THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly
Preamble. resolved to constitute India into a 1\[SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST
SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC\] and to secure to all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political; LIBERTY of thought, expression,
belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to
promote among them all FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual
and the 2\[unity and integrity of the Nation\]; IN OUR CONSTITUENT
ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT
AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION. 1Subs. by the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2, for “SOVEREIGN DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC” (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 2Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unity of the
Nation” (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). Name and territory of the Union. Admission or
establishment of new States. Formation of new States and alteration of
areas, boundaries or names of existing States. PART I THE UNION AND ITS
TERRITORY 1. (1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States.
1\[(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as specified in
the First Schedule.\] (3) The territory of India shall comprise— (a) the
territories of the States; 2\[(b) the Union territories specified in the
First Schedule; and\] (c) such other territories as may be acquired. 2.
Parliament may by law admit into the Union, or establish, new States on
such terms and conditions as it thinks fit. 32A. \[Sikkim to be
associated with the Union.\] Rep. by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975). 3. Parliament may by law—
(a) form a new State by separation of territory from any State or by
uniting two or more States or parts of States or by uniting any
territory to a part of any State; (b) increase the area of any State;

3)  diminish the area of any State;

4)  alter the boundaries of any State;

5)  alter the name of any State:

4\[Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in either
House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President and
unless, where the proposal contained in the Bill affects the area,
boundaries 1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
2, for cl. (2). 2Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub-clause (b). 3Article 2A
was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2
(w.e.f.

1-3-1975). 4Subs. by the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 2,
for the proviso. 2

or name of any of the States 1\*\*\*, the Bill has been referred by the
President to the Legislature of that State for expressing its views
thereon within such period as may be specified in the reference or
within such further period as the President may allow and the period so
specified or allowed has expired.\] 2\[Explanation I.—In this article,
in clauses (a) to (e), “State’’ includes a Union territory, but in the
proviso,”State’’ does not include a Union territory. Explanation II.—The
power conferred on Parliament by clause (a) includes the power to form a
new State or Union territory by uniting a part of any State or Union
territory to any other State or Union territory.\] 4. (1) Any law
referred to in article 2 or article 3 shall contain such provisions for
the amendment of the First Schedule and the Fourth Schedule as may be
necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also
contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions
(including provisions as to representation in Parliament and in the
Legislature or Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law)
as Parliament may deem necessary. (2) No such law as aforesaid shall be
deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368. Laws made under articles 2 and 3 to provide for the
amendment of the First and the Fourth Schedules and supplemental,
incidental and consequential matters. 1The words and letters “specified
in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 2Ins. by the Constitution
(Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2.

PART II

Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution. Rights of
citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan.
CITIZENSHIP 5. At the commencement of this Constitution, every person
who has his domicile in the territory of India and— (a) who was born in
the territory of India; or (b) either of whose parents was born in the
territory of India; or

3)  who has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for not
    less than five years immediately preceding such commencement,

shall be a citizen of India. 6. Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a
person who has migrated to the territory of India from the territory now
included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the
commencement of this Constitution if— (a) he or either of his parents or
any of his grandparents was born in India as defined in the Government
of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted); and

2)  
3)  in the case where such person has so migrated before the nineteenth
    day of July, 1948, he has been ordinarily resident in the territory
    of India since the date of his migration, or

<!-- end list -->

2)  in the case where such person has so migrated on or after the
    nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been registered as a citizen of
    India by an officer appointed in that behalf by the Government of
    the Dominion of India on an application made by him therefor to such
    officer before the commencement of this Constitution in the form and
    manner prescribed by that Government:

Provided that no person shall be so registered unless he has been
resident in the territory of India for at least six months immediately
preceding the date of his application. 4

7.  Notwithstanding anything in articles 5 and 6, a person who has after
    the first day of March, 1947, migrated from the territory of India
    to the territory now included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be
    a citizen of India:

Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a person who, after
having so migrated to the territory now included in Pakistan, has
returned to the territory of India under a permit for resettlement or
permanent return issued by or under the authority of any law and every
such person shall for the purposes of clause (b) of article 6 be deemed
to have migrated to the territory of India after the nineteenth day of
July, 1948.

8.  Notwithstanding anything in article 5, any person who or either of
    whose parents or any of whose grandparents was born in India as
    defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally
    enacted), and who is ordinarily residing in any country outside
    India as so defined shall be deemed to be a citizen of India if he
    has been registered as a citizen of India by the diplomatic or
    consular representative of India in the country where he is for the
    time being residing on an application made by him therefor to such
    diplomatic or consular representative, whether before or after the
    commencement of this Constitution, in the form and manner prescribed
    by the Government of the Dominion of India or the Government of
    India.

9.  No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of article 5, or be
    deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue of article 6 or article 8,
    if he has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign State.

10. Every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India under any
    of the foregoing provisions of this Part shall, subject to the
    provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament, continue to be
    such citizen.

11. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall derogate from
    the power of Parliament to make any provision with respect to the
    acquisition and termination of citizenship and all other matters
    relating to citizenship.

Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan. Rights of
citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing outside India.
Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to be
citizens. Continuance of the rights of citizenship. Parliament to
regulate the right of citizenship by law. Definition. Laws inconsistent
with or in derogation of the fundamental rights.

PART III FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS General 12. In this Part, unless the context
otherwise requires, “the State’’ includes the Government and Parliament
of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States
and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or
under the control of the Government of India.

13. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the
    commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are
    inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent
    of such inconsistency, be void.

2)  The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the
    rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of
    this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.

3)  In this article, unless the context otherwise requires,—

<!-- end list -->

1)  “law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation,
    notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the
    force of law;

2)  “laws in force” includes laws passed or made by a Legislature or
    other competent authority in the territory of India before the
    commencement of this Constitution and not previously repealed,
    notwithstanding that any such law or any part thereof may not be
    then in operation either at all or in particular areas.

1\[(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any amendment of this
Constitution made under article 368.\] Right to Equality 14. The State
shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal
protection of the laws within the territory of India. Equality before
law. 1Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s.
2. 6 15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on
grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of
them. (2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste,
sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any disability,
liability, restriction or condition with regard to—

1)  access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public
    entertainment; or

2)  the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public
    resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated
    to the use of the general public.

<!-- end list -->

3)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any
    special provision for women and children.

1\[(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall
prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement
of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.\] 2\[(5) Nothing in this
article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent
the State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement
of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for
the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special
provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by
the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to
in clause (1) of article 30.\] 16. (1) There shall be equality of
opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or
appointment to any office under the State. (2) No citizen shall, on
grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth,
residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in
respect of, any employment or office under the State.

3)  Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law
    prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or
    appointm ent to an office

Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex
or place of birth. Equality of opportunity in matters of public
employment. 1Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s.
2. 2Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, s. 2
(w.e.f. 20-1-2006).

Abolition of Untouchability. Abolition of titles. (Part III.—Fundamental
Rights.—Arts. 16—18.) 1\[under the Government of, or any local or other
authority within, a State or Union territory, any requirement as to
residence within that State or Union territory\] prior to such
employment or appointment. (4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the
State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or
posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion
of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the
State. 2\[(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from
making any provision for reservation 3\[in matters of promotion, with
consequential seniority, to any class\] or classes of posts in the
services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately
represented in the services under the State.\] 4\[(4B) Nothing in this
article shall prevent the State from considering any unfilled vacancies
of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in
accordance with any provision for reservation made under clause (4) or
clause (4A) as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any
succeeding year or years and such class of vacancies shall not be
considered together with the vacancies of the year in which they are
being filled up for determining the ceiling of fifty per cent.
reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.\] (5) Nothing in
this article shall affect the operation of any law which provides that
the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any
religious or denominational institution or any member of the governing
body thereof shall be a person professing a particular religion or
belonging to a particular denomination. 17. “Untouchability” is
abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of
any disability arising out of “Untouchability” shall be an offence
punishable in accordance with law.

18. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  No title, not being a military or academic distinction, shall be
    conferred by the State.

2)  No citizen of India shall accept any title from any foreign State.
    1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and
    Sch., for “under any State specified in the First Schedule or any
    local or other authority within its territory, any requirement as to
    residence within that State”. 2Ins. by the Constitution
    (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995, s. 2. 3Subs. by the
    Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for certain
    words (w.e.f. 17-6-1995). 4Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-first
    Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-6-2000).

3)  No person who is not a citizen of India shall, while he holds any
    office of profit or trust under the State, accept without the
    consent of the President any title from any foreign State.

4)  No person holding any office of profit or trust under the State
    shall, without the consent of the President, accept any present,
    emolument, or office of any kind from or under any foreign State.

Right to Freedom 19. (1) All citizens shall have the right— (a) to
freedom of speech and expression;

2)  to assemble peaceably and without arms;

3)  to form associations or unions;

4)  to move freely throughout the territory of India;

5)  to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India; 1\[and\]
    2* * \* \* \*

6)  to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or
    business. 3\[(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall
    affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from
    making any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable
    restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said
    sub-clause in the interests of 4\[the sovereignty and integrity of
    India,\] the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign
    States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to
    contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.\]

<!-- end list -->

3)  Nothing in sub-clause (b) of the said clause shall affect the
    operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent
    the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of 4\[the
    sovereignty and integrity of India or\] public order, reasonable
    restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said
    sub-clause.

4)  Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the
    operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent
    the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of 4\[the
    sovereignty and

Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc. 1Ins. by
the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 2 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). 2Sub-clause (f) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 3, for cl.
(2) (with retrospective

effect). 4Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s.
2. Protection in respect of conviction for offences. Protection of life
and personal liberty. (Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 19—21.)
integrity of India or\] public order or morality, reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said
sub-clause. (5) Nothing in 1\[sub-clauses (d) and (e)\] of the said
clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it
imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of any of the rights conferred by the said
sub-clauses either in the interests of the general public or for the
protection of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe.

6)  Nothing in sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall affect the
    operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent
    the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the
    general public, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right
    conferred by the said sub-clause, and, in particular, 2\[nothing in
    the said sub-clause shall affect the operation of any existing law
    in so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from making any law
    relating to,—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the professional or technical qualifications necessary for
    practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or
    business, or

2)  the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or
    controlled by the State, of any trade, business, industry or
    service, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens
    or otherwise\].

<!-- end list -->

20. 1)  No person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation
        of a law in force at the time of the commission of the Act
        charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater
        than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force
        at the time of the commission of the offence.

<!-- end list -->

2)  No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more
    than once.

3)  No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness
    against himself.

<!-- end list -->

21. No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
    according to procedure established by law. 1Subs. by the
    Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 2, for
    ”sub-clauses (d), (e) and (f)” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 2Subs. by the
    Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 3, for certain words.
    \*\[21A. The State shall provide free and compulsory education to
    all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as
    the State may, by law, determine.\]

22. 1)  No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without
        being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such
        arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be
        defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be
    produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of
    twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for
    the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the magistrate
    and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said
    period without the authority of a magistrate.
3)  Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall apply—

<!-- end list -->

1)  to any person who for the time being is an enemy alien; or

2)  to any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing
    for preventive detention.

\*\*(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the
detention of a person for a longer period than three months unless— (a)
an Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or have been, or are
qualified to be appointed Right to education. Protection against arrest
and detention in certain cases. \*Ins by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 2 (which is not yet in force, date to be
notified later on). \*\*Cl. (4) shall stand substituted by the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 3 (which is yet not
in force, date to be notified later on) as— “(4) No law providing for
preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for a
longer period than two months unless an Advisory Board constituted in
acordance with the recommendations of the Chief Justice of the
appropriate Hight Court has reported before the expiration of the said
period of two months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for
such detention: Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a
Chairman and not less than two other members, and the Chairman shall be
a serving Judge of the appropriate High Court and the other menbers
shall be serving or retired Judges of any High Court: Provided further
that nothing in this clause shall authorise the detention of any person
beyond the maximum period prescribed by any law made by Parliament under
sub-clause (a) of clause (7). Explanation.—In this clause, “appropriate
High Court” means,— (i) in the case of the detention of a person in
pursuance of an order of detention made by the Government of India or an
officer or authority subordinate to that Government, the High Court for
the Union territory of Delhi;

(ii ) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order
of detention made by the Government of any State (other than a Union
territory), the High Court for the State; and

3)  in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of
    detention made by the administrator of a Union territory or an
    officer or authority subordinate to such administrator, such High
    Court as may be specified by or under any law made by Parliament in
    this behalf.” (Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Art. 22.) as, Judges of
    a High Court has reported before the expiration of the said period
    of three months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for
    such detention: Provided that nothing in this sub-clause shall
    authorise the detention of any person beyond the maximum period
    prescribed by any law made by Parliament under sub-clause (b) of
    clause (7); or

<!-- end list -->

2)  such person is detained in accordance with the provisions of any law
    made by Parliament under sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (7).

<!-- end list -->

5)  When any person is detained in pursuance of an order made under any
    law providing for preventive detention, the authority making the
    order shall, as soon as may be, communicate to such person the
    grounds on which the order has been made and shall afford him the
    earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order.

6)  Nothing in clause (5) shall require the authority making any such
    order as is referred to in that clause to disclose facts which such
    authority considers to be against the public interest to disclose.

7)  Parliament may by law prescribe— \*(a) the circumstances under
    which, and the class or classes of cases in which, a person may be
    detained for a period longer than three months under any law
    providing for preventive detention without obtaining the opinion of
    an Advisory Board in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause
    (a) of clause (4); \*\*(b) the maximum period for which any person
    may in any class or classes of cases be detained under any law
    providing for preventive detention; and

<!-- end list -->

3)  the procedure to be followed by an Advisory Board in an inquiry
    under ***\[sub-clause (a) of clause (4)\]. *Sub-clause (a) shall
    stand omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
    1978, s. 3 (which is yet not in force, date to be notified later
    on). **Sub-clause (b) shall stand relettered as sub-clause (a) by s.
    3, ibid. (which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on).
    \*\*\*The words, letter and figure in brackets shall stand
    substituted as “clause (4)” by

<!-- end list -->

19. 3, ibid. (which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on).
    Right against Exploitation

<!-- end list -->

23. 1)  Traffic in human beings and begar and other similar forms of
        forced labour are prohibited and any contravention of this
        provision shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from imposing
    compulsory service for public purposes, and in imposing such service
    the State shall not make any discrimination on grounds only of
    religion, race, caste or class or any of them.

<!-- end list -->

24. No child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work
    in any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.
    Right to Freedom of Religion

25. 1)  Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other
        provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to
        freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise
        and propagate religion.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing
    law or prevent the State from making any law—

<!-- end list -->

1)  regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or
    other secular activity which may be associated with religious
    practice;

2)  providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of
    Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes
    and sections of Hindus.

Explanation I.—The wearing and carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to be
included in the profession of the Sikh religion. Explanation II.—In
sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the reference to Hindus shall be construed
as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or
Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religious institutions
shall be construed accordingly. 26. Subject to public order, morality
and health, every religious denomination or any section thereof shall
have the right— (a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious
and charitable purposes; (b) to manage its own affairs in matters of
religion; Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.
Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc. Freedom of
conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion.
Freedom to manage religious affairs. Freedom as to payment of taxes for
promotion of any particular religion. Freedom as to attendance at
religious instruction or religious worship in certain educational
institutions. Protection of interests of minorities. Right of minorities
to establish and administer educational institutions. (Part
III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 26—30.) (c) to own and acquire movable
and immovable property; and

4)  to administer such property in accordance with law.

<!-- end list -->

27. No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of which
    are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the
    promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious
    denomination.

28. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  No religious instruction shall be provided in any educational
    institution wholly maintained out of State funds.

2)  Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to an educational institution
    which is administered by the State but has been established under
    any endowment or trust which requires that religious instruction
    shall be imparted in such institution.

3)  No person attending any educational institution recognised by the
    State or receiving aid out of State funds shall be required to take
    part in any religious instruction that may be imparted in such
    institution or to attend any religious worship that may be conducted
    in such institution or in any premises attached thereto unless such
    person or, if such person is a minor, his guardian has given his
    consent thereto.

Cultural and Educational Rights 29. (1) Any section of the citizens
residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct
language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve
the same. (2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational
institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. 30.
(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have
the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice. 1\[(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory
acquisition of any property of an educational institution established
and administered by a minority, 1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 4 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). referred to in clause
(1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under
such law for the acquisition of such property is such as would not
restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.\] (2) The
State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions,
discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it
is under the management of a minority, whether based on religion or
language. 1* * \* 31. \[Compulsory acquisition of property.\] Rep. by
the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 6 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). 2\[Saving of Certain Laws\] 3\[31A. 4\[(1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in article 13, no law providing for— (a) the
acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein or the
extinguishment or modification of any such rights, or

2)  the taking over of the management of any property by the State for a
    limited period either in the public interest or in order to secure
    the proper management of the property, or

3)  the amalgamation of two or more corporations either in the public
    interest or in order to secure the proper management of any of the
    corporations, or

4)  the extinguishment or modification of any rights of managing agents,
    secretaries and treasurers, managing directors, directors or
    managers of corporations, or of any voting rights of shareholders
    thereof, or

Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc. 1The
sub-heading “Right to Property” omitted by the Constitution
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 5 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 2Ins. by
the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977). 3Ins. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 4
(with retrospective effect). 4Subs. by the Constitution (Fourth
Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 3, for cl. (1) (with retrospective effect).
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Art. 31A.) (e) the extinguishment or
modification of any rights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease or
licence for the purpose of searching for, or winning, any mineral or
mineral oil, or the premature termination or cancellation of any such
agreement, lease or licence, shall be deemed to be void on the ground
that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the
rights conferred by 1\[article 14 or article 19\]: Provided that where
such law is a law made by the Legislature of a State, the provisions of
this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been
reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his
assent:\] 2\[Provided further that where any law makes any provision for
the acquisition by the State of any estate and where any land comprised
therein is held by a person under his personal cultivation, it shall not
be lawful for the State to acquire any portion of such land as is within
the ceiling limit applicable to him under any law for the time being in
force or any building or structure standing thereon or appurtenant
thereto, unless the law relating to the acquisition of such land,
building or structure, provides for payment of compensation at a rate
which shall not be less than the market value thereof.\] (2) In this
article,— 3\[(a) the expression ‘’estate’’ shall, in relation to any
local area, have the same meaning as that expression or its local
equivalent has in the existing law relating to land tenures in force in
that area and shall also include— (i) any jagir, inam or muafi or other
similar grant and in the States of 4\[Tamil Nadu\] and Kerala, any
janmam right; 1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 7, for “article 14, article 19 or article 31” (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). 2Ins. by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964,
s. 2. 3Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub-clause (a) (with retrospective
effect). 4Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53
of 1968), s. 4, for “Madras”. (w.e..f. 14-1-1969). (ii) any land held
under ryotwari settlement; (iii) any land held or let for purposes of
agriculture or for purposes ancillary thereto, including waste land,
forest land, land for pasture or sites of buildings and other structures
occupied by cultivators of land, agricultural labourers and village
artisans;\] (b) the expression ‘’rights’’, in relation to an estate,
shall include any rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-proprietor,
under-proprietor, tenure-holder, 1\[raiyat, under-raiyat\] or other
intermediary and any rights or privileges in respect of land revenue.\]
2\[31B. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained
in article 31A, none of the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth
Schedule nor any of the provisions thereof shall be deemed to be void,
or ever to have become void, on the ground that such Act, Regulation or
provision is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the
rights conferred by, any provisions of this Part, and notwithstanding
any judgment, decree or order of any court or Tribunal to the contrary,
each of the said Acts and Regulations shall, subject to the power of any
competent Legislature to repeal or amend it, continue in force.\]
3\[31C. Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law giving
effect to the policy of the State towards securing 4\[all or any of the
principles laid down in Part IV\] shall be deemed to be void on the
ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of
the rights conferred by 5\[article 14 or article 19\]; 6and no law
Validation of certain Acts and Regulations. Saving of laws giving effect
to certain directive principles. 1Ins. by the Constitution (Fourth
Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 3 (with retrospective effect). 2Ins. by the
Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 5. 3Ins. by the
Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f.
20-4-1972). 4Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act,
1976, s. 4, for “the principles

specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of article 39” (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
Section 4 has been declared invalid by the Supreme Court in Minerva
Mills Ltd. and others vs. Union of India and others (1980) 2. S.C.C.
591. 5Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
8, for “article 14, article 19 or article 31” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 6In
Kesavananda Bharati vs. The State of Kerala, (1973) Supp. S.C.R. 1, the
Supreme Court held the provisions in italics to be invalid. Remedies for
enforcement of rights conferred by this Part. (Part III.—Fundamental
Rights.—Arts. 31C—32A.) containing a declaration that it is for giving
effect to such policy shall be called in question in any court on the
ground that it does not give effect to such policy: Provided that where
such law is made by the Legislature of a State, the provisions of this
article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved
for the consideration of the President, has received his assent. 131D.
\[Saving of laws in respect of anti-national activities.\] Rep. by the
Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 2 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
Right to Constitutional Remedies 32. (1) The right to move the Supreme
Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights
conferred by this Part is guaranteed. (2) The Supreme Court shall have
power to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs in the
nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and
certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of any of
the rights conferred by this Part.

3)  Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court by
    clauses (1) and (2), Parliament may by law empower any other court
    to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any
    of the powers exercisable by the Supreme Court under clause (2).

4)  The right guaranteed by this article shall not be suspended except
    as otherwise provided for by this Constitution.

232A. \[Constitutional validity of State laws not to be considered in
proceedings under article 32.\] Rep. by the Constitution (Forty-third
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 3 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 1Ins. by the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 5 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 2Ins. by s.
6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 1\[33. Parliament may, by law, determine to
what extent any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their
application to,— (a) the members of the Armed Forces; or (b) the members
of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order; or

3)  persons employed in any bureau or other organisation established by
    the State for purposes of intelligence or counter intelligence; or

4)  person employed in, or in connection with, the telecommunication
    systems set up for the purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation
    referred to in clauses (a) to (c),

be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their
duties and the maintenance of discipline among them.\] 34.
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part,
Parliament may by law indemnify any person in the service of the Union
or of a State or any other person in respect of any act done by him in
connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area
within the territory of India where martial law was in force or validate
any sentence passed, punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered or other
act done under martial law in such area. 35. Notwithstanding anything in
this Constitution,— (a) Parliament shall have, and the Legislature of a
State shall not have, power to make laws— (i) with respect to any of the
matters which under clause (3) of article 16, clause (3) of article 32,
article 33 and article 34 may be provided for by law made by Parliament;
and

2)  for prescribing punishment for those acts which are declared to be
    offences under this Part;

Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part in their
application to Forces, etc. Restriction on rights conferred by this Part
while martial law is in force in any area. Legislation to give effect to
the provisions of this Part. 1Subs. by the Constitution (Fiftieth
Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for art. 33. (Part III.—Fundamental
Rights.—Art. 35.) and Parliament shall, as soon as may be after the
commencement of this Constitution, make laws for prescribing punishment
for the acts referred to in sub-clause (ii); (b) any law in force
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution in the
territory of India with respect to any of the matters referred to in
sub-clause (i) of clause (a) or providing for punishment for any act
referred to in sub-clause (ii) of that clause shall, subject to the
terms thereof and to any adaptations and modifications that may be made
therein under article 372, continue in force until altered or repealed
or amended by Parliament. Explanation.—In this article, the expression
“law in force” has the same meaning as in article 372.

PART IV

DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY 36. In this Part, unless the
context otherwise requires, “the State” has the same meaning as in Part
III.

37. The provisions contained in this Part shall not be enforceable by
    any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless
    fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the
    duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws.

38. 1\[(1)\] The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people
    by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order
    in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all
    the institutions of the national life.

2\[(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the
inequalities in income, and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in
status, facilities and opportunities, not only amongst individuals but
also amongst groups of people residing in different areas or engaged in
different vocations.\]

39. The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing—

<!-- end list -->

1)  that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an
    adequate means of livelihood;

2)  that the ownership and control of the material resources of the
    community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;

3)  that the operation of the economic system does not result in the
    concentration of wealth and means of production to the common
    detriment;

4)  that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;

Definition. Application of the principles contained in this Part. State
to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people.
Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State. 1Art. 38
renumbered as cl. (1) thereof by the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 9 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 2Ins. by s. 9, ibid.
(w.e.f 20-6-1979). 21

(Part IV.—Directive Principles of State Policy.— Arts. 39—43.) Equal
justice and free legal aid. Organisation of village panchayats. Right to
work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases. Provision
for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief. Living
wage, etc., for workers. (e) that the health and strength of workers,
men and women, and the tender age of children are not abused and that
citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter avocations
unsuited to their age or strength; 1\[(f) that children are given
opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in
conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are
protected against exploitation and against moral and material
abandonment.\] 2\[39A. The State shall secure that the operation of the
legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and
shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or
schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing
justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other
disabilities.\] 40. The State shall take steps to organise village
panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as may be
necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.

41. The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and
    development, make effective provision for securing the right to
    work, to education and to public assistance in cases of
    unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases
    of undeserved want.

42. The State shall make provision for securing just and humane
    conditions of work and for maternity relief.

43. The State shall endeavour to secure, by suitable legislation or
    economic organisation or in any other way, to all workers,
    agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage,
    conditions of work ensuring a decent

1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 7, for
cl. (f) (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 2Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural
opportunities and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to promote
cottage industries on an individual or co-operative basis in rural
areas. 1\[43A. The State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in
any other way, to secure the participation of workers in the management
of undertakings, establishments or other organisations engaged in any
industry.\] 44. The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a
uniform civil code throughout the territory of India. \*\[45. The State
shall endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from the
commencement of this Constitution, for free and compulsory education for
all children until they complete the age of fourteen years.\] 46. The
State shall promote with special care the educational and economic
interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them
from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.

47. The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the
    standard of living of its people and the improvement of public
    health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State
    shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except
    for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are
    injurious to health.

48. The State shall endeavour to organise agriculture and animal
    husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, in particular,
    take steps for preserving and improving the breeds, and prohibiting
    the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught
    cattle.

Participation of workers in management of industries. Uniform civil code
for the citizens. Provision for free and compulsory education for
children. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections. Duty of the State to
raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve
public health. Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry. 1Ins.
by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 9 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977). \*Art. 45 shall stand substituted by the Constitution
(Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 3 (which is yet not in force,
date to be notified later on) as— “45. Provision for early childhood
care and education to children below the age of six years.—The State
shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all
children until they complete the age of six years.”. (Part IV.—Directive
Principles of State Policy.— Arts. 48A—51.) Protection and improvement
of environment and safeguarding of forests and wild life. Protection of
monuments and places and objects of national importance. Separation of
judiciary from executive. Promotion of international peace and security.
1\[48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment
and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country.\] 49. It
shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument or place
or object of artistic or historic interest, 2\[declared by or under law
made by Parliament\] to be of national importance, from spoliation,
disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may
be.

50. The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the
    executive in the public services of the State.

51. The State shall endeavour to—

<!-- end list -->

1)  promote international peace and security;

2)  maintain just and honourable relations between nations;

3)  foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the
    dealings of organized peoples with one another; and

4)  encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.

1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 10
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 2Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 27, for “declared by Parliament by law”.

1\[PART IVA FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES 51A. It shall be the duty of every
citizen of India— (a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its
ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem;

2)  to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national
    struggle for freedom;

3)  to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;

4)  to defend the country and render national service when called upon
    to do so;

5)  to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
    the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional
    or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the
    dignity of women;

6)  to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;

7)  to protect and improve the natural environment including forests,
    lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living
    creatures;

8)  to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry
    and reform;

9)  to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;

10) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and
    collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher
    levels of endeavour and achievement;

*\[(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for
education to his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of
six and fourteen years.\] Fundamental duties. 1Ins. by the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 11 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). *Ins. by
the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 4 (which is yet
not in force, date to be notified later on). 25

The President of India. Executive power of the Union. Election of
President.

PART V THE UNION CHAPTER I.—THE EXECUTIVE The President and
Vice-President 52. There shall be a President of India. 53. (1) The
executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall
be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to
him in accordance with this Constitution. (2) Without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing provision, the supreme command of the
Defence Forces of the Union shall be vested in the President and the
exercise thereof shall be regulated by law. (3) Nothing in this article
shall—

1)  be deemed to transfer to the President any functions conferred by
    any existing law on the Government of any State or other authority;
    or

2)  prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on authorities
    other than the President.

<!-- end list -->

54. The President shall be elected by the members of an electoral
    college consisting of—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and

( b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.

1\[Explanation.—In this article and in article 55, ‘’State’’ includes
the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Union territory of
\*Pondicherry.\] 1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment) Act,
1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1995). \*Now Puducherry, vide the Pondicherry
(Alteration of Name) Act, 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-10-2006). 26

55. 1)  As far as practicable, there shall be uniformity in the scale of
        representation of the different States at the election of the
        President.

<!-- end list -->

2)  For the purpose of securing such uniformity among the States inter
    se as well as parity between the States as a whole and the Union,
    the number of votes which each elected member of Parliament and of
    the Legislative Assembly of each State is entitled to cast at such
    election shall be determined in the following manner:—

<!-- end list -->

1)  every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State shall
    have as many votes as there are multiples of one thousand in the
    quotient obtained by dividing the population of the State by the
    total number of the elected members of the Assembly;

2)  if, after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the remainder
    is not less than five hundred, then the vote of each member referred
    to in sub-clause (a) shall be further increased by one;

3)  each elected member of either House of Parliament shall have such
    number of votes as may be obtained by dividing the total number of
    votes assigned to the members of the Legislative Assemblies of the
    States under sub-clauses (a) and

4)  by the total number of the elected members of both Houses of
    Parliament, fractions exceeding one-half being counted as one and
    other fractions being disregarded.

<!-- end list -->

3)  The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the
    system of proportional representation by means of the single
    transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret
    ballot.

1\[Explanation.—In this article, the expression ‘’population’’ means the
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published: Provided that the reference in
this Explanation to the last preceding census of which the relevant
figures have Manner of election of President. 1Subs. by the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 12, for the Explanation (w.e.f.
3-1-1977). Term of office of President. Eligibility for re­election.
Qualifications for election as President. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts.
55—58.) been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first
census taken after the year 1\[2026\] have been published, be construed
as a reference to the 1971 census.\] 56. (1) The President shall hold
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon
his office: Provided that— (a) the President may, by writing under his
hand addressed to the Vice-President, resign his office;

( b) the President may, for violation of the Constitution, be removed
from office by impeachment in the manner provided in article 61;

3)  the President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term,
    continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Any resignation addressed to the Vice-President under clause (a) of
    the proviso to clause (1) shall forthwith be communicated by him to
    the Speaker of the House of the People.

<!-- end list -->

57. A person who holds, or who has held, office as President shall,
    subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, be eligible
    for re-election to that office.

58. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  No person shall be eligible for election as President unless he—

<!-- end list -->

1)  is a citizen of India,

2)  has completed the age of thirty-five years, and

3)  is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People.

<!-- end list -->

2)  A person shall not be eligible for election as President if he holds
    any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government
    of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the
    control of any of the said Governments. 1Subs. by the Constitution
    (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for “2000”.
    Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not
    be deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the
    President or Vice-President of the Union or the Governor 1\*\*\* of
    any State or is a Minister either for the Union or for any State.

<!-- end list -->

59. 1)  The President shall not be a member of either House of
        Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State, and if
        a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the
        Legislature of any State be elected President, he shall be
        deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on
        which he enters upon his office as President.

<!-- end list -->

2)  The President shall not hold any other office of profit.

3)  The President shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use
    of his official residences and shall be also entitled to such
    emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by
    Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made,
    such emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specified in the
    Second Schedule.

4)  The emoluments and allowances of the President shall not be
    diminished during his term of office.

<!-- end list -->

60. Every President and every person acting as President or discharging
    the functions of the President shall, before entering upon his
    office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of
    India or, in his absence, the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court
    available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to
    say— “I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will faith­
    solemnly affirm fully execute the office of President (or discharge
    the functions of the President) of India and will to the best of my
    ability preserve, protect and defend the Conditions of President’s
    office. Oath or affirmation by the President. 1The words “or
    Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
    Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. Procedure for impeachment of
    the President. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the
    office of President and the term of office of person elected to fill
    casual vacancy. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 60—62.) Constitution and
    the law and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being
    of the people of India”.

61. 1)  When a President is to be impeached for violation of the
        Constitution, the charge shall be preferred by either House of
        Parliament.

<!-- end list -->

2)  No such charge shall be preferred unless—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the proposal to prefer such charge is contained in a resolution
    which has been moved after at least fourteen days’ notice in writing
    signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of
    the House has been given of their intention to move the resolution,
    and

2)  such resolution has been passed by a majority of not less than
    two-thirds of the total membership of the House.

<!-- end list -->

3)  When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament,
    the other House shall investigate the charge or cause the charge to
    be investigated and the President shall have the right to appear and
    to be represented at such investigation.

4)  If as a result of the investigation a resolution is passed by a
    majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the
    House by which the charge was investigated or caused to be
    investigated, declaring that the charge preferred against the
    President has been sustained, such resolution shall have the effect
    of removing the President from his office as from the date on which
    the resolution is so passed.

<!-- end list -->

62. 1)  An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the
        term of office of President shall be completed before the
        expiration of the term.

<!-- end list -->

2)  An election to fill a vacancy in the office of President occurring
    by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall
    be held as soon as possible after, and in no case later than six
    months from, the date of occurrence of the vacancy; and the person
    elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of
    article 56, be entitled to hold office for the full term of five
    years from the date on which he enters upon his office.

<!-- end list -->

63. There shall be a Vice-President of India.
64. The Vice-President shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of
    States and shall not hold any other office of profit:

Provided that during any period when the Vice-President acts as
President or discharges the functions of the President under article 65,
he shall not perform the duties of the office of Chairman of the Council
of States and shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance payable
to the Chairman of the Council of States under article 97.

65. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the
    President by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or
    otherwise, the Vice-President shall act as President until the date
    on which a new President elected in accordance with the provisions
    of this Chapter to fill such vacancy enters upon his office.

2)  When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to
    absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President shall
    discharge his functions until the date on which the President
    resumes his duties.

3)  The Vice-President shall, during, and in respect of, the period
    while he is so acting as, or discharging the functions of,
    President, have all the powers and immunities of the President and
    be entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be
    determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf
    is so made, such emoluments, allowances and privileges as are
    specified in the Second Schedule.

<!-- end list -->

66. 1)  The Vice-President shall be elected by the 1\[members of an
        electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of
        Parliament\] in accordance The Vice-President of India. The
        Vice-President to be ex officio Chairman of the Council of
        States. The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge
        his functions during casual vacancies in the office, or during
        the absence, of President. Election of Vice-President. 1Subs. by
        the Constitution (Eleventh Amendment) Act, 1961, s. 2, for
        “members of both Houses of Parliament assembled at a joint
        meeting”. Term of office of Vice-President. (Part V.—The
        Union.—Arts. 66—67.) with the system of proportional
        representation by means of the single transferable vote and the
        voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.

<!-- end list -->

2)  The Vice-President shall not be a member of either House of
    Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State, and if a
    member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the
    Legislature of any State be elected Vice-President, he shall be
    deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which
    he enters upon his office as Vice-President.

3)  No person shall be eligible for election as Vice-President unless
    he—

<!-- end list -->

1)  is a citizen of India;

2)  has completed the age of thirty-five years; and

3)  is qualified for election as a member of the Council of States.

<!-- end list -->

4)  A person shall not be eligible for election as Vice-President if he
    holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the
    Government of any State or under any local or other authority
    subject to the control of any of the said Governments.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be
deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the
President or Vice-President of the Union or the Governor 1\*\*\* of any
State or is a Minister either for the Union or for any State. 67. The
Vice-President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date
on which he enters upon his office: Provided that— (a) a Vice-President
may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his
office; 1The words “or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh” omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (b) a
Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the
Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of the
Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution for
the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen days’
notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution;

3)  a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term,
    continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.

<!-- end list -->

68. 1)  An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the
        term of office of Vice-President shall be completed before the
        expiration of the term.

<!-- end list -->

2)  An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President
    occurring by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or
    otherwise shall be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of
    the vacancy, and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall,
    subject to the provisions of article 67, be entitled to hold office
    for the full term of five years from the date on which he enters
    upon his office.

<!-- end list -->

69. Every Vice-President shall, before entering upon his office, make
    and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that
    behalf by him, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is
    to say— “I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will bear true
    solemnly affirm faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as
    by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty
    upon which I am about to enter.”
70. Parliament may make such provisions as it thinks fit for the
    discharge of the functions of the President in any contingency not
    provided for in this Chapter. 1\[71. (1) All doubts and disputes
    arising out of or in connection with the election of a President or
    Vice-President shall be inquired into and decided by the Supreme
    Court whose decision shall be final. Time of holding election to
    fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President and the term of office
    of person elected to fill casual vacancy. Oath or affirmation by the
    Vice-President. Discharge of President’s functions in other
    contingencies. Matters relating to, or connected with, the election
    of a President or Vice-President. 1Art. 71 has been successively
    subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2
    (w.e.f. 10-8-1975) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
    Act, 1978,

<!-- end list -->

19. 10, to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). Power of President to grant
    pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain
    cases. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 71—72.)

<!-- end list -->

2)  If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is
    declared void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him in the exercise
    and performance of the powers and duties of the office of President
    or Vice-President, as the case may be, on or before the date of the
    decision of the Supreme Court shall not be invalidated by reason of
    that declaration.

3)  Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by
    law regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election
    of a President or Vice-President.

4)  The election of a person as President or Vice-President shall not be
    called in question on the ground of the existence of any vacancy for
    whatever reason among the members of the electoral college electing
    him.\]

<!-- end list -->

72. 1)  The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves,
        respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or
        commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence—

<!-- end list -->

1)  in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;

2)  in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence
    against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of
    the Union extends;

3)  in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power
    conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to
    suspend, remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial.

3)  Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall affect the power to
    suspend, remit or commute a sentence of death exercisable by the
    Governor 1\*\*\* of a State under any law for the time being in
    force.

1The words “or Rajpramukh “ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 73. (1) Subject to the provisions
of this Constitution, the executive power of the Union shall extend— (a)
to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws;
and

2)  to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are
    exercisable by the Government of India by virtue of any treaty or
    agreement:

Provided that the executive power referred to in sub-clause (a) shall
not, save as expressly provided in this Constitution or in any law made
by Parliament, extend in any State 1\*\*\* to matters with respect to
which the Legislature of the State has also power to make laws. (2)
Until otherwise provided by Parliament, a State and any officer or
authority of a State may, notwithstanding anything in this article,
continue to exercise in matters with respect to which Parliament has
power to make laws for that State such executive power or functions as
the State or officer or authority thereof could exercise immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution. Council of Ministers 74.
2\[(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at
the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of
his functions, act in accordance with such advice:\] 3\[Provided that
the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such
advice, either generally or otherwise, and the President shall act in
accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.\] (2)
The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by
Ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any court.
Extent of executive power of the Union. Council of Ministers to aid and
advise President. 1The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B
of the First Schedule” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 13, for cl. (1) (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 3Ins. by the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 11 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 75—76.) Other provisions as to
Ministers. Attorney-General for India. 75. (1) The Prime Minister shall
be appointed by the President and the other Ministers shall be appointed
by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister. 1\[(1A) The total
number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of
Ministers shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of
members of the House of the People. (1B) A member of either House of
Parliament belonging to any political party who is disqualified for
being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule
shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under clause
(1) for duration of the period commencing from the date of his
disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such
member would expire or where he contests any election to either House of
Parliament before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he
is declared elected, whichever is earlier.\] (2) The Ministers shall
hold office during the pleasure of the President.

3)  The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the
    House of the People.

4)  Before a Minister enters upon his office, the President shall
    administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to
    the forms set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

5)  A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a
    member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that
    period cease to be a Minister.

6)  The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as Parliament
    may from time to time by law determine and, until Parliament so
    determines, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule.

The Attorney-General for India 76. (1) The President shall appoint a
person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court to
be Attorney-General for India. (2) It shall be the duty of the
Attorney-General to give advice to the Government of India upon such
legal 1Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s.
2. matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character, as
may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by the President,
and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this
Constitution or any other law for the time being in force. (3) In the
performance of his duties the Attorney-General shall have right of
audience in all courts in the territory of India.

4)  The Attorney-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the
    President, and shall receive such remuneration as the President may
    determine.

Conduct of Government Business 77. (1) All executive action of the
Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the
President. (2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the
name of the President shall be authenticated in such manner as may be
specified in rules1 to be made by the President, and the validity of an
order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in
question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or
executed by the President.

3)  The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction
    of the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation
    among Ministers of the said business.

2\* \* \* \* 78. It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister— (a) to
communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of Ministers
relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals
for legislation;

2)  to furnish such information relating to the administration of the
    affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President
    may call for; and

Conduct of business of the Government of India. Duties of Prime Minister
as respects the furnishing of information to the President, etc. 1See
Notification No. S. O. 2297, dated the 3rd November, 1958, Gazette of
India, Extraordinary, 1958, Pt. II, Sec. 3(ii), p. 1315, as amended from
time to time. 2Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 14 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and omitted by the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 12 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 78—80.) Constitution of
Parliament. Composition of the Council of States. (c) if the President
so requires, to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers
any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which
has not been considered by the Council. CHAPTER II.—PARLIAMENT General
79. There shall be a Parliament for the Union which shall consist of the
President and two Houses to be known respectively as the Council of
States and the House of the People. 80. (1) 1\[2\*\*\* The Council of
States\] shall consist of— (a) twelve members to be nominated by the
President in accordance with the provisions of clause (3); and

2)  not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representatives of the
    States 3\[and of the Union territories.\]

<!-- end list -->

2)  The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by
    representatives of the States 3\[and of the Union territories\]
    shall be in accordance with the provisions in that behalf contained
    in the Fourth Schedule.

3)  The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) of
    clause (1) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or
    practical experience in respect of such matters as the following,
    namely:­

Literature, science, art and social service.

4)  The representatives of each State 4\*\*\* in the Council of States
    shall be elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly
    of the State in accordance with the system of proportional
    representation by means of the single transferable vote.

5)  The representatives of the 5\[Union territories\] in the Council of
    States shall be chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law
    prescribe.

1Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3, for
“The Council of States” (w.e.f. 1-3-1975). 2The words “subject to the
provisions of paragraph 4 of the Tenth Schedule” omitted by the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f.
26-4-1975). 3Added by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
3. 4The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First
Schedule” omitted by s. 3, ibid. 5Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “States
specified in Part C of the First Schedule”. 1\[81. (1) 2\[Subject to the
provisions of article 331 3\*\*\*\], the House of the People shall
consist of— (a) not more than 4\[five hundred and thirty members\]
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the States,
and

2)  not more than 5\[twenty members\] to represent the Union
    territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.

<!-- end list -->

2)  For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),—

<!-- end list -->

1)  there shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in the House
    of the People in such manner that the ratio between that number and
    the population of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for
    all States; and

2)  each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such
    manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency
    and the number of seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable,
    the same throughout the State:

6\[Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a) of this clause shall
not be applicable for the purpose of allotment of seats in the House of
the People to any State so long as the population of that State does not
exceed six millions.\] (3) In this article, the expression “population”
means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of
which the relevant figures have been published: 7\[Provided that the
reference in this clause to the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures
for the first census taken after the year 8\[2026\] have been published,
9\[be construed,— Composition of the House of the People. 1Subs. by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 4, for arts. 81 and 82.
2Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974 s. 4, for
“Subject to the provisions of article 331” (w.e.f. 1-3-1975). 3The
words and figure “and paragraph 4 of the Tenth Schedule” omitted by the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f.
26-4-1975). 4Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987
(18 of 1987), s. 63, for “five hundred and twenty-five members” (w.e.f.
30-5-1987). 5Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act,
1973, s. 2, for “twenty-five members”. 6Ins. by s. 2, ibid. 7Ins. by the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 15 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977). 8Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act,
2001, s. 3, for “2000”. 9Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for certain words. (Part
V.—The Union.—Arts. 81—83.) Readjustment after each census. Duration of
Houses of Parliament. (i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause
(2) and the proviso to that clause, as a reference to the 1971 census;
and

2)  for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2) as a reference to
    the 1\[2001\] census.\]\]

<!-- end list -->

82. Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the
    House of the People to the States and the division of each State
    into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such
    authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
    Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in
    the House of the People until the dissolution of the then existing
    House: 2\[Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect
    from such date as the President may, by order, specify and until
    such readjustment takes effect, any election to the House may be
    held on the basis of the territorial constituencies existing before
    such readjustment: Provided also that until the relevant figures for
    the first census taken after the year 3\[2026\] have been published,
    it shall not be necessary to 4\[readjust— (

<!-- end list -->

1)  the allocation of seats in the House of People to the States as
    readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and

<!-- end list -->

2)  the division of each State into territorial constituencies as may be
    readjusted on the basis of the 5\[2001\] census,

under this article.\]\] 83. (1) The Council of States shall not be
subject to dissolution, but as nearly as possible one-third of the
members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration of
every second year in accordance with the provisions made in that behalf
by Parliament by law. 1Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh
Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for “1991”. 2Ins. by the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 16 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 3Subs. by
the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 4, for “2000”.
4Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for certain words. 5Subs. by the Constitution
(Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3, for “1991”.

2)  The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for
    1\[five years\] from the date appointed for its first meeting and no
    longer and the expiration of the said period of 1\[five years\]
    shall operate as a dissolution of the House: Provided that the said
    period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be
    extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at
    a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months
    after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.

<!-- end list -->

84. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in
    Parliament unless he— 2\[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and
    subscribes before some person authorised in that behalf by the
    Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set
    out for the purpose in the Third Schedule;\]

<!-- end list -->

2)  is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than
    thirty years of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the
    People, not less than twenty-five years of age; and

3)  possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that
    behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.

3\[85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of
Parliament to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six
months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and
the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session. (2) The
President may from time to time— (a) prorogue the Houses or either
House;

2)  dissolve the House of the People.\]

<!-- end list -->

86. 1)  The President may address either House of Parliament or both
        Houses assembled together, and for that purpose require the
        attendance of members. Qualification for membership of
        Parliament. Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.
        Right of President to address and send messages to Houses.
        1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
        s. 13, for “six years” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). The words “six years”
        were subs. for the original words “five years” by the
        Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 17 (w.e.f.
        3-1-1977). 2Subs. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act,
        1963, s. 3, for cl. (a). 3Subs. by the Constitution (First
        Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 6, for art. 85. Special address by the
        President. Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects
        Houses. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of
        States. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the
        office of Deputy Chairman. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 86—90.)

<!-- end list -->

2)  The President may send messages to either House of Parliament,
    whether with respect to a Bill then pending in Parliament or
    otherwise, and a House to which any message is so sent shall with
    all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the message
    to be taken into consideration.

<!-- end list -->

87. 1)  At the commencement of 1\[the first session after each general
        election to the House of the People and at the commencement of
        the first session of each year\] the President shall address
        both Houses of Parliament assembled together and inform
        Parliament of the causes of its summons.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of
    either House for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters
    referred to in such address 2\*\*\*.

<!-- end list -->

88. Every Minister and the Attorney-General of India shall have the
    right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of,
    either House, any joint sitting of the Houses, and any committee of
    Parliament of which he may be named a member, but shall not by
    virtue of this article be entitled to vote. Officers of Parliament

89. 1)  The Vice-President of India shall be ex officio Chairman of the
        Council of States.

<!-- end list -->

2)  The Council of States shall, as soon as may be, choose a member of
    the Council to be Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the
    office of Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose
    another member to be Deputy Chairman thereof.

<!-- end list -->

90. A member holding office as Deputy Chairman of the Council of States—

<!-- end list -->

1)  shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council;

2)  may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed to the
    Chairman, resign his office; and

3)  may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council passed
    by a majority of all the then members of the Council:

1Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 7, for “every
session”. 2The words “and for the precedence of such discussion over
other business of the House” omitted by s. 7, ibid. Provided that no
resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless at least
fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the
resolution. 91. (1) While the office of Chairman is vacant, or during
any period when the Vice-President is acting as, or discharging the
functions of, President, the duties of the office shall be performed by
the Deputy Chairman, or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also
vacant, by such member of the Council of States as the President may
appoint for the purpose. (2) During the absence of the Chairman from any
sitting of the Council of States the Deputy Chairman, or, if he is also
absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of
the Council, or, if no such person is present, such other person as may
be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman. 92. (1) At any
sitting of the Council of States, while any resolution for the removal
of the Vice-President from his office is under consideration, the
Chairman, or while any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman
from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Chairman, shall not,
though he is present, preside, and the provisions of clause (2) of
article 91 shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply
in relation to a sitting from which the Chairman, or, as the case may
be, the Deputy Chairman, is absent. (2) The Chairman shall have the
right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Council of States while any resolution for the removal of the
Vice-President from his office is under consideration in the Council,
but, notwithstanding anything in article 100, shall not be entitled to
vote at all on such resolution or on any other matter during such
proceedings. 93. The House of the People shall, as soon as may be,
choose two members of the House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy
Speaker thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker
becomes vacant, the House shall choose another member to be Speaker or
Deputy Speaker, as the case may be. Power of the Deputy Chairman or
other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as,
Chairman. The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration. The
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People. Vacation and
resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy
Speaker. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker. The Speaker or the
Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from
office is under consideration. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 94—96.) 94. A
member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the House of the
People— (a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the
House of the People;

2)  may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed, if such member
    is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the
    Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and

3)  may be removed from his office by a resolution of the House of the
    People passed by a majority of all the then members of the House:

Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved
unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to
move the resolution: Provided further that, whenever the House of the
People is dissolved, the Speaker shall not vacate his office until
immediately before the first meeting of the House of the People after
the dissolution. 95. (1) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the
duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or, if the
office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the House of
the People as the President may appoint for the purpose. (2) During the
absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the House of the People the
Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be
determined by the rules of procedure of the House, or, if no such person
is present, such other person as may be determined by the House, shall
act as Speaker. 96. (1) At any sitting of the House of the People, while
any resolution for the removal of the Speaker from his office is under
consideration, the Speaker, or while any resolution for the removal of
the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy
Speaker, shall not, though he is present, preside, and the provisions of
clause (2) of article 95 shall apply in relation to every such sitting
as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker, or, as
the case may be, the Deputy Speaker, is absent. (2) The Speaker shall
have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of, the House of the People while any resolution for his
removal from office is under consideration in the House and shall,
notwithstanding anything in article 100, be entitled to vote only in the
first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such
proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes. 97. There shall
be paid to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of
States, and to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the
People, such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by
Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such
salaries and allowances as are specified in the Second Schedule.

98. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  Each House of Parliament shall have a separate secretarial staff:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing
the creation of posts common to both Houses of Parliament. (2)
Parliament may by law regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of
service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of either House
of Parliament.

3)  Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (2), the
    President may, after consultation with the Speaker of the House of
    the People or the Chairman of the Council of States, as the case may
    be, make rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of
    service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the House
    of the People or the Council of States, and any rules so made shall
    have effect subject to the provisions of any law made under the said
    clause.

Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and the
Speaker and Deputy Speaker. Secretariat of Parliament. Oath or
affirmation by members. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act
notwithstanding vacancies and quorum. Vacation of seats. (Part V.—The
Union.—Arts. 99—101.) Conduct of Business 99. Every member of either
House of Parliament shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe
before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an
oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the
Third Schedule.

100. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at
    any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses shall be
    determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting,
    other than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker.

The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the
first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case
of an equality of votes. (2) Either House of Parliament shall have power
to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any
proceedings in Parliament shall be valid notwithstanding that it is
discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do
sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.

3)  Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the quorum to constitute
    a meeting of either House of Parliament shall be one-tenth of the
    total number of members of the House.

4)  If at any time during a meeting of a House there is no quorum, it
    shall be the duty of the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as
    such, either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until
    there is a quorum.

Disqualifications of Members 101. (1) No person shall be a member of
both Houses of Parliament and provision shall be made by Parliament by
law for the vacation by a person who is chosen a member of both Houses
of his seat in one House or the other. (2) No person shall be a member
both of Parliament and of a House of the Legislature of a State 1\*\*\*,
and if a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of a House of
the Legislature of 2\[a State\], then, at the expiration of such period
as may be specified in rules3 made by the President, that person’s seat
in Parliament shall become vacant, unless he has previously resigned his
seat in the Legislature of the State. (3) If a member of either House of
Parliament—

1)  becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in
    4\[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 102\], or

5\[(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the
Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, and his resignation is
accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,\] his seat
shall thereupon become vacant: 6\[Provided that in the case of any
resignation referred to in sub-clause (b), if from information received
or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the
Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, is satisfied that such
resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such
resignation.\] (4) If for a period of sixty days a member of either
House of Parliament is without permission of the House absent from all
meetings thereof, the House may declare his seat vacant: Provided that
in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall be taken of
any period during 1The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B
of the First Schedule” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 2Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., “such a
State”. 3See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950,
published with the Ministry of Law Notification No. F. 46/50-C, dated
the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, p. 678. 4Subs.
by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 2, for
“clause (1) of article 102” (w.e.f. 1-3-1985). 5Subs. by the
Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2, for sub-clause
(b). 6Ins. by s. 2, ibid. Disqualifications for membership. Decision on
questions as to disqualifications of members. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts.
101—103.) which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for more than
four consecutive days. 102. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of Parliament— (a) if
he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State, other than an office declared by Parliament by
law not to disqualify its holder;

2)  if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
    court;

3)  if he is an undischarged insolvent;

4)  if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the
    citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of
    allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;

5)  if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.

1\[Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause\] a person shall not be
deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State by reason only that he is a Minister either for
the Union or for such State. 2\[(2) A person shall be disqualified for
being a member of either House of Parliament if he is so disqualified
under the Tenth Schedule.\] 3\[103. (1) If any question arises as to
whether a member of either House of Parliament has become subject to any
of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article 102, the
question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his
decision shall be final. 1Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second
Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 3, for “(2) For the purposes of this article”
(w.e.f. 1-3-1985) 2Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-1985). 3Art. 103 has
been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act, 1976, s. 20 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 14 to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). (2)
Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall
obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to
such opinion.\] 104. If a person sits or votes as a member of either
House of Parliament before he has complied with the requirements of
article 99, or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is
disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so
doing by the provisions of any law made by Parliament, he shall be
liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty
of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union.
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members 105. (1)
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the rules and
standing orders regulating the procedure of Parliament, there shall be
freedom of speech in Parliament. (2) No member of Parliament shall be
liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of any thing said or
any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee thereof, and no
person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the
authority of either House of Parliament of any report, paper, votes or
proceedings.

3)  In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each
    House of Parliament, and of the members and the committees of each
    House, shall be such as may from time to time be defined by
    Parliament by law, and, until so defined, 1\[shall be those of that
    House and of its members and committees immediately before the
    coming into force of section 15 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth
    Amendment) Act, 1978.\]

4)  The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation
    to persons who by virtue of this Constitution have the right to
    speak in, and otherwise to

Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation under
article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified. Powers,
privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the members and
committees thereof. 1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). Salaries and
allowances of members. Provisions as to introduction and passing of
Bills. Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases. (Part V.—The
Union.—Arts. 105—108.) take part in the proceedings of, a House of
Parliament or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members
of Parliament. 106. Members of either House of Parliament shall be
entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to
time be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that
respect is so made, allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as
were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution applicable
in the case of members of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of
India. Legislative Procedure 107. (1) Subject to the provisions of
articles 109 and 117 with respect to Money Bills and other financial
Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of Parliament. (2) Subject
to the provisions of articles 108 and 109, a Bill shall not be deemed to
have been passed by the Houses of Parliament unless it has been agreed
to by both Houses, either without amendment or with such amendments only
as are agreed to by both Houses.

3)  A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the
    prorogation of the Houses.

4)  A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by
    the House of the People shall not lapse on a dissolution of the
    House of the People.

5)  A Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having
    been passed by the House of the People is pending in the Council of
    States, shall, subject to the provisions of article 108, lapse on a
    dissolution of the House of the People.

<!-- end list -->

108. 1)  If after a Bill has been passed by one House and transmitted to
         the other House—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the Bill is rejected by the other House; or
2)  the Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be made in
    the Bill; or
3)  more than six months elapse from the date of the reception of the
    Bill by the other House without the Bill being passed by it, the
    President may, unless the Bill has elapsed by reason of a
    dissolution of the House of the People, notify to the Houses by
    message if they are sitting or by public notification if they are
    not sitting, his intention to summon them to meet in a joint sitting
    for the purpose of deliberating and voting on the Bill: Provided
    that nothing in this clause shall apply to a Money Bill.

<!-- end list -->

2)  In reckoning any such period of six months as is referred to in
    clause (1), no account shall be taken of any period during which the
    House referred to in sub-clause (c) of that clause is prorogued or
    adjourned for more than four consecutive days.

3)  Where the President has under clause (1) notified his intention of
    summoning the Houses to meet in a joint sitting, neither House shall
    proceed further with the Bill, but the President may at any time
    after the date of his notification summon the Houses to meet in a
    joint sitting for the purpose specified in the notification and, if
    he does so, the Houses shall meet accordingly.

4)  If at the joint sitting of the two Houses the Bill, with such
    amendments, if any, as are agreed to in joint sitting, is passed by
    a majority of the total number of members of both Houses present and
    voting, it shall be deemed for the purposes of this Constitution to
    have been passed by both Houses:

Provided that at a joint sitting— (a) if the Bill, having been passed by
one House, has not been passed by the other House with amendments and
returned to the House in which it originated, no amendment shall be
proposed to the Bill other than such amendments (if any) as are made
necessary by the delay in the passage of the Bill; Special procedure in
respect of Money Bills. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 108-109.) (b) if the
Bill has been so passed and returned, only such amendments as aforesaid
shall be proposed to the Bill and such other amendments as are relevant
to the matters with respect to which the Houses have not agreed; and the
decision of the person presiding as to the amendments which are
admissible under this clause shall be final. (5) A joint sitting may be
held under this article and a Bill passed thereat, notwithstanding that
a dissolution of the House of the People has intervened since the
President notified his intention to summon the Houses to meet therein.
109. (1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of States.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it
shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations
and the Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from
the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the
People with its recommendations and the House of the People may
thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of
the Council of States.

3)  If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the
    Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been
    passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Council
    of States and accepted by the House of the People.

4)  If the House of the People does not accept any of the
    recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be
    deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it
    was passed by the House of the People without any of the amendments
    recommended by the Council of States.

5)  If a Money Bill passed by the House of the People and transmitted to
    the Council of States for its recommendations is not returned to the
    House of the

People within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to
have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in
the form in which it was passed by the House of the People. 110. (1) For
the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill
if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following
matters, namely:— (a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration
or regulation of any tax;

2)  the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any
    guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law
    with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be
    undertaken by the Government of India;

3)  the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of
    India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from
    any such Fund;

4)  the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;

(e ) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure;

(f ) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India
or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or
the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or

7)  any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses
    (a) to (f).

<!-- end list -->

2)  A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it
    provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties,
    or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for
    services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition,
    abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any
    local authority or body for local purposes. Definition of “Money
    Bills”. Assent to Bills. Annual financial statement. (Part V.—The
    Union.—Arts. 110—112.)

3)  If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the
    decision of the Speaker of the House of the People thereon shall be
    final.

4)  There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted
    to the Council of States under article 109, and when it is presented
    to the President for assent under article 111, the certificate of
    the Speaker of the House of the People signed by him that it is a
    Money Bill.

<!-- end list -->

111. When a Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament, it shall
     be presented to the President, and the President shall declare
     either that he assents to the Bill, or that he withholds assent
     therefrom: Provided that the President may, as soon as possible
     after the presentation to him of a Bill for assent, return the Bill
     if it is not a Money Bill to the Houses with a message requesting
     that they will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions
     thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of
     introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message,
     and when a Bill is so returned, the Houses shall reconsider the
     Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the Houses
     with or without amendment and presented to the President for
     assent, the President shall not withhold assent therefrom.
     Procedure in Financial Matters

112. 1)  The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to
         be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the
         estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India
         for that year, in this Part referred to as the “annual
         financial statement”.

<!-- end list -->

2)  The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial
    statement shall show separately—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution
    as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and
2)  the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from
    the Consolidated Fund of India, and shall distinguish expenditure on
    revenue account from other expenditure.

<!-- end list -->

3)  The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the
    Consolidated Fund of India— (

<!-- end list -->

1)  the emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure
    relating to his office;

<!-- end list -->

2)  the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman
    of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of
    the House of the People;

3)  debt charges for which the Government of India is liable including
    interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other
    expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and
    redemption of debt;

4)  
5)  the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of
    Judges of the Supreme Court;

<!-- end list -->

2)  the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Federal
    Court;

3)  the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of any High Court
    which exercises jurisdiction in relation to any area included in the
    territory of India or which at any time before the commencement of
    this Constitution exercised jurisdiction in relation to any area
    included in 1\[a Governor’s Province of the Dominion of India\];

<!-- end list -->

5)  the salary, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of the
    Comptroller and Auditor-General of India; 1Subs. by the Constitution
    (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for “a Province
    corresponding to a State specified in Part A of the First Schedule”.
    Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates. Appropriation
    Bills. THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 112—114.)

6)  any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any
    court or arbitral tribunal;

7)  any other expenditure declared by this Constitution or by Parliament
    by law to be so charged.

<!-- end list -->

113. 1)  So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon
         the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be submitted to the
         vote of Parliament, but nothing in this clause shall be
         construed as preventing the discussion in either House of
         Parliament of any of those estimates.

<!-- end list -->

2)  So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall
    be submitted in the form of demands for grants to the House of the
    People, and the House of the People shall have power to assent, or
    to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand
    subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.

3)  No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of
    the President.

<!-- end list -->

114. 1)  As soon as may be after the grants under article 113 have been
         made by the House of the People, there shall be introduced a
         Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated
         Fund of India of all moneys required to meet—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the grants so made by the House of the People; and

2)  the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India but not
    exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously
    laid before Parliament.

<!-- end list -->

2)  No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in either House of
    Parliament which will have the effect of varying the amount or
    altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying the
    amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India,
    and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment
    is inadmissible under this clause shall be final.
3)  Subject to the provisions of articles 115 and 116, no money shall be
    withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under
    appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions
    of this article.

<!-- end list -->

115. 1)  The President shall—

<!-- end list -->

1)  if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the
    provisions of article 114 to be expended for a particular service
    for the current financial year is found to be insufficient for the
    purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the current
    financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon some
    new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for
    that year, or

2)  if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year
    in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year,

cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament another statement
showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be
presented to the House of the People a demand for such excess, as the
case may be. (2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall have
effect in relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and
also to any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out
of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure or the grant
in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to the annual
financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand
for a grant and the law to be made for the authorisation of
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet
such expenditure or grant. 116. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the House of the People shall have
power— (a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated
expenditure for a part of any financial Supplementary, additional or
excess grants. Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.
(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 116-117.) Special provisions as to financial
Bills. year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in
article 113 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in
accordance with the provisions of article 114 in relation to that
expenditure; (b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon
the resources of India when on account of the magnitude or the
indefinite character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the
details ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;

3)  to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current
    service of any financial year;

and Parliament shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of
moneys from the Consolidated Fund of India for the purposes for which
the said grants are made. (2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114
shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause

1)  and to any law to be made under that clause as they have effect in
    relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure
    mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made
    for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the
    Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure.

<!-- end list -->

117. 1)  A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters
         specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article
         110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the
         recommendation of the President and a Bill making such
         provision shall not be introduced in the Council of States:
         Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this
         clause for the moving of an amendment making provision for the
         reduction or abolition of any tax.

<!-- end list -->

2)  A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of
    the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the
    imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand
    or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
    reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission,
    alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body
    for local purposes.
3)  A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve
    expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed
    by either House of Parliament unless the President has re­commended
    to that House the consideration of the Bill. Procedure Generally

<!-- end list -->

118. 1)  Each House of Parliament may make rules for regulating, subject
         to the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure and the
         conduct of its business.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and
    standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this
    Constitution with respect to the Legislature of the Dominion of
    India shall have effect in relation to Parliament subject to such
    modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Chairman
    of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People,
    as the case may be.

3)  The President, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council
    of States and the Speaker of the House of the People, may make rules
    as to the procedure with respect to joint sittings of, and
    communications between, the two Houses.

4)  At a joint sitting of the two Houses the Speaker of the House of the
    People, or in his absence such person as may be determined by rules
    of procedure made under clause (3), shall preside.

<!-- end list -->

119. Parliament may, for the purpose of the timely completion of
     financial business, regulate by law the procedure of, and the
     conduct of business in, each House of Parliament in relation to any
     financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out
     of the Consolidated Fund of India, and, if and so far as any
     provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any rule made by
     a House of Parliament under clause (1) of article 118 or with any
     rule or standing order having Rules of procedure. Regulation by law
     of procedure in Parliament in relation to financial business.
     Language to be used in Parliament. Restriction on discussion in
     Parliament. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament.
     Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of
     Parliament. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 119—123.) effect in relation
     to Parliament under clause (2) of that article, such provision
     shall prevail.

120. 1)  Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but subject to the
         provisions of article 348, business in Parliament shall be
         transacted in Hindi or in English: Provided that the Chairman
         of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the People,
         or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any
         member who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in
         English to address the House in his mother-tongue.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this article shall,
    after the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the
    commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if the words “or
    in English” were omitted therefrom.

<!-- end list -->

121. No discussion shall take place in Parliament with respect to the
     conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the
     discharge of his duties except upon a motion for presenting an
     address to the President praying for the removal of the Judge as
     hereinafter provided.

122. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  The validity of any proceedings in Parliament shall not be called in
    question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

2)  No officer or member of Parliament in whom powers are vested by or
    under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of
    business, or for maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject
    to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him
    of those powers. CHAPTER III.—LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT

<!-- end list -->

123. 1)  If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in
         session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist
         which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he
         may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to
         him to require.

<!-- end list -->

2)  An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same
    force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—

<!-- end list -->

1)  shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to
    operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of
    Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions
    disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the
    second of those resolutions; and
2)  may be withdrawn at any time by the President. Explanation.—Where
    the Houses of Parliament are summoned to reassemble on different
    dates, the period of six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of
    those dates for the purposes of this clause.

<!-- end list -->

3)  If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision
    which Parliament would not under this Constitution be competent to
    enact, it shall be void. 1* * \* \* CHAPTER IV.—THE UNION JUDICIARY

<!-- end list -->

124. 1)  There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief
         Justice of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a
         larger number, of not more than seven2 other Judges.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President
    by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with such of
    the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States
    as the President may deem necessary for the purpose and shall hold
    office until he attains the age of sixty-five years: Provided that
    in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice,
    the Chief Justice of India Establishment and constitution of Supreme
    Court. 1Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth
    Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2 (retrospectively) and omitted by the
    Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,

<!-- end list -->

19. 16 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 2Now “twenty-five”, vide the Supreme Court
    (Number of Judges) Amendment Act, 1986 (22 of 1986), s. 2. (Part
    V.—The Union.—Art. 124.) shall always be consulted: Provided
    further that—

<!-- end list -->

1)  a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President,
    resign his office;

2)  a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner provided in
    clause (4).

1\[(2A) The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be determined by
such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.\]
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of the
Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of India and— (a) has been for at
least five years a Judge of a High Court or of two or more such Courts
in succession; or

2)  has been for at least ten years an advocate of a High Court or of
    two or more such Courts in succession; or

( c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist.

Explanation I.—In this clause “High Court’’ means a High Court which
exercises, or which at any time before the commencement of this
Constitution exercised, jurisdiction in any part of the territory of
India. Explanation II.—In computing for the purpose of this clause the
period during which a person has been an advocate, any period during
which a person has held judicial office not inferior to that of a
district judge after he became an advocate shall be included. (4) A
Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except
by an order of the President passed after an address by each House of
Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of that House
and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that
House present and 1Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act,
1963, s. 2. voting has been presented to the President in the same
session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity. (5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the
presentation of an address and for the investigation and proof of the
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge under clause (4).

6)  Every person appointed to be a Judge of the Supreme Court shall,
    before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the
    President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath
    or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the
    Third Schedule.

7)  No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall
    plead or act in any court or before any authority within the
    territory of India.

<!-- end list -->

125. 1\[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the Supreme Court such
     salaries as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until
     provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries as are specified
     in the Second Schedule.\]

<!-- end list -->

2)  Every Judge shall be entitled to such privileges and allowances and
    to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as may
    from time to time be determined by or under law made by Parliament
    and, until so determined, to such privileges, allowances and rights
    as are specified in the Second Schedule: Provided that neither the
    privileges nor the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect
    of leave of absence or pension shall be varied to his disadvantage
    after his appointment.

<!-- end list -->

126. When the office of Chief Justice of India is vacant or when the
     Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to
     perform the duties of his office, Salaries, etc., of Judges.
     Appointment of acting Chief Justice. 1Subs. by the Constitution
     (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2, for cl. (1) (w.e.f.
     1-4-1986). Appointment of ad hoc Judges. Attendance of retired
     Judges at sittings of the Supreme Court. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts.
     126—128.) the duties of the office shall be performed by such one
     of the other Judges of the Court as the President may appoint for
     the purpose.

127. 1)  If at any time there should not be a quorum of the Judges of
         the Supreme Court available to hold or continue any session of
         the Court, the Chief Justice of India may, with the previous
         consent of the President and after consultation with the Chief
         Justice of the High Court concerned, request in writing the
         attendance at the sittings of the Court, as an ad hoc Judge,
         for such period as may be necessary, of a Judge of a High Court
         duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court
         to be designated by the Chief Justice of India.

<!-- end list -->

2)  It shall be the duty of the Judge who has been so designated, in
    priority to other duties of his office, to attend the sittings of
    the Supreme Court at the time and for the period for which his
    attendance is required, and while so attending he shall have all the
    jurisdiction, powers and privileges, and shall discharge the duties,
    of a Judge of the Supreme Court.

<!-- end list -->

128. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Chief Justice of
     India may at any time, with the previous consent of the President,
     request any person who has held the office of a Judge of the
     Supreme Court or of the Federal Court 1\[or who has held the office
     of a Judge of a High Court and is duly qualified for appointment as
     a Judge of the Supreme Court\] to sit and act as a Judge of the
     Supreme Court, and every such person so requested shall, while so
     sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as the President
     may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and
     privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of
     that Court: Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed
     to require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge
     of that Court unless he consents so to do. 1Ins. by the
     Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 3.

129. The Supreme Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the
     powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt
     of itself.

130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or
     places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the
     President, from time to time, appoint.

131. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Supreme Court
     shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have original
     jurisdiction in any dispute—

<!-- end list -->

1)  between the Government of India and one or more States; or

2)  between the Government of India and any State or States on one side
    and one or more other States on the other; or

3)  between two or more States, if and in so far as the dispute involves
    any question (whether of law or fact) on which the existence or
    extent of a legal right depends: 1\[Provided that the said
    jurisdiction shall not extend to a dispute arising out of any
    treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar
    instrument which, having been entered into or executed before the
    commencement of this Constitution, continues in operation after such
    commencement, or which provides that the said jurisdiction shall not
    extend to such a dispute.\] 2131A. \[Exclusive jurisdiction of the
    Supreme Court in regard to questions as to constitutional validity
    of Central laws.\] Rep. by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment)
    Act, 1977, s. 4 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).

<!-- end list -->

132. 1)  An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment,
         decree or final order of a High Court in the territory of
         India, whether in a civil, criminal or Supreme Court to be a
         court of record. Seat of Supreme Court. Original jurisdiction
         of the Supreme Court. Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court
         in appeals from High Courts in certain cases. 1Subs. by the
         Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 5, for the
         proviso. 2Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
         Act, 1976, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). Appellate jurisdiction of
         Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in regard to civil
         matters. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 132-133.) other proceeding,
         1\[if the High Court certifies under article 134A\] that the
         case involves a substantial question of law as to the
         interpretation of this Constitution. 2* * \* \*

<!-- end list -->

3)  Where such a certificate is given, 3\*\*\* any party in the case may
    appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that any such question as
    aforesaid has been wrongly decided 3\*\*\*. Explanation.—For the
    purposes of this article, the expression “final order” includes an
    order deciding an issue which, if decided in favour of the
    appellant, would be sufficient for the final disposal of the case.

<!-- end list -->

133. 4\[(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment,
     decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court in the
     territory of India 5\[if the High Court certifies under article
     134A—\]

<!-- end list -->

1)  that the case involves a substantial question of law of general
    importance; and

2)  that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be
    decided by the Supreme Court.\]

<!-- end list -->

2)  Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any party appealing to the
    Supreme Court under clause (1) may urge as one of the grounds in
    such appeal that a substantial question of law as to the
    interpretation of this Constitution has been wrongly decided.

3)  Notwithstanding anything in this article, no appeal shall, unless
    Parliament by law otherwise provides, lie to the Supreme Court from
    the judgment, decree or final order of one Judge of a High Court.

1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 17,
for “if the High Court certifies” (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 2Cl. (2) omitted by
s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 3Certain words omitted by s. 17, ibid.
(w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 4Subs. by the Constitution (Thirtieth Amendment) Act,
1972, s. 2, for cl. (1) (w.e.f. 27-2-1973). 5Subs. by the Constitution
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 18, for “if the High Court
certifies—” (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 134. (1) An appeal shall lie to the
Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal
proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court—
(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person
and sentenced him to death; or

2)  has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court
    subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the
    accused person and sentenced him to death; or

3)  1\[certifies under article 134A\] that the case is a fit one for
    appeal to the Supreme Court:

Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to such
provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of article 145
and to such conditions as the High Court may establish or require. (2)
Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to
entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in
a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India subject
to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law.
2\[134A. Every High Court, passing or making a judgment, decree, final
order, or sentence, referred to in clause (1) of article 132 or clause
(1) of article 133, or clause (1) of article 134,— (a) may, if it deems
fit so to do, on its own motion; and

2)  shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party
    aggrieved, immediately after the passing or making of such judgment,
    decree, final order or sentence,

determine, as soon as may be after such passing or making, the question
whether a certificate of the nature Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme
Court in regard to criminal matters. Certificate for appeal to the
Supreme Court. 1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 19, for “certifies” (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 2Ins. by s. 20, ibid.
(w.e.f. 1-8-1979). Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under
existing law to be exercisable by the Supreme Court. Special leave to
appeal by the Supreme Court. Review of judgments or orders by the
Supreme Court. Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain writs. (Part
V.—The Union.—Arts. 134A—139.) referred to in clause (1) of article 132,
or clause (1) of article 133 or, as the case may be, sub-clause (c) of
clause (1) of article 134, may be given in respect of that case.\] 135.
Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the Supreme Court shall also
have jurisdiction and powers with respect to any matter to which the
provisions of article 133 or article 134 do not apply if jurisdiction
and powers in relation to that matter were exercisable by the Federal
Court immediately before the commencement of this Constitution under any
existing law.

136. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme Court may, in
    its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment,
    decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter
    passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India.

2)  Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment, determination,
    sentence or order passed or made by any court or tribunal
    constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.

<!-- end list -->

137. Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or any
     rules made under article 145, the Supreme Court shall have power to
     review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.

138. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  The Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers
    with respect to any of the matters in the Union List as Parliament
    may by law confer.

2)  The Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers
    with respect to any matter as the Government of India and the
    Government of any State may by special agreement confer, if
    Parliament by law provides for the exercise of such jurisdiction and
    powers by the Supreme Court.

<!-- end list -->

139. Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court power to issue
     directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of
     habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari,
     or any of them, for any purposes other than those mentioned in
     clause (2) of article 32. 1\[139A. 2\[(1) Where cases involving the
     same or substantially the same questions of law are pending before
     the Supreme Court and one or more High Courts or before two or more
     High Courts and the Supreme Court is satisfied on its own motion or
     on an application made by the Attorney-General of India or by a
     party to any such case that such questions are substantial
     questions of general importance, the Supreme Court may withdraw the
     case or cases pending before the High Court or the High Courts and
     dispose of all the cases itself: Provided that the Supreme Court
     may after determining the said questions of law return any case so
     withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such questions to
     the High Court from which the case has been withdrawn, and the High
     Court shall on receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in
     conformity with such judgment.\]

<!-- end list -->

2)  The Supreme Court may, if it deems it expedient so to do for the
    ends of justice, transfer any case, appeal or other proceedings
    pending before any High Court to any other High Court.\]

<!-- end list -->

140. Parliament may by law make provision for conferring upon the
     Supreme Court such supplemental powers not inconsistent with any of
     the provisions of this Constitution as may appear to be necessary
     or desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court more effectively
     to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by or under this
     Constitution.

141. The law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all
     courts within the territory of India.

142. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  The Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass such
    decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice
    in any cause or matter pending before it, and any decree so passed
    or

Transfer of certain cases. Ancillary powers of Supreme Court. Law
declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts. Enforcement of
decrees and orders of Supreme Court and orders as to discovery, etc.
1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 24
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 21, for cl. (1) (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). Power of President to
consult Supreme Court. Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of
the Supreme Court. (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 142—144A.) order so made
shall be enforceable throughout the territory of India in such manner as
may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament and, until
provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the President may
by order1 prescribe. (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in
this behalf by Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, as respects the
whole of the territory of India, have all and every power to make any
order for the purpose of securing the attendance of any person, the
discovery or production of any documents, or the investigation or
punishment of any contempt of itself. 143. (1) If at any time it appears
to the President that a question of law or fact has arisen, or is likely
to arise, which is of such a nature and of such public importance that
it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court upon it, he
may refer the question to that Court for consideration and the Court
may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its
opinion thereon. (2) The President may, notwithstanding anything in
2\*\*\* the proviso to article 131, refer a dispute of the kind
mentioned in the 3\[said proviso\] to the Supreme Court for opinion and
the Supreme Court shall, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to
the President its opinion thereon. 144. All authorities, civil and
judicial, in the territory of India shall act in aid of the Supreme
Court. 4144A. \[Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating
to constitutional validity of laws.\] Rep. by the Constitution
(Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 1See the
Supreme Court (Decrees and Orders) Enforcement Order, 1954 (C. O. 47).
2The words , brackets and figures “clause (i) of” omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 3Subs. by s.
29 and Sch., ibid., for “said clause”. 4Ins. by the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 145. (1)
Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the Supreme
Court may from time to time, with the approval of the President, make
rules for regulating generally the practice and procedure of the Court
including— (a) rules as to the persons practising before the Court;

2)  rules as to the procedure for hearing appeals and other matters
    pertaining to appeals including the time within which appeals to the
    Court are to be entered;

3)  rules as to the proceedings in the Court for the enforcement of any
    of the rights conferred by Part III;

1\[(cc) rules as to the proceedings in the Court under 2\[article
139A\];\]

4)  rules as to the entertainment of appeals under sub-clause (c) of
    clause (1) of article 134;

5)  rules as to the conditions subject to which any judgment pronounced
    or order made by the Court may be reviewed and the procedure for
    such review including the time within which applications to the
    Court for such review are to be entered;

6)  rules as to the costs of and incidental to any proceedings in the
    Court and as to the fees to be charged in respect of proceedings
    therein;

7)  rules as to the granting of bail;

8)  rules as to stay of proceedings;

9)  rules providing for the summary determination of any appeal which
    appears to the Court to be frivolous or vexatious or brought for the
    purpose of delay;

10) rules as to the procedure for inquiries referred to in clause (1) of
    article 317.

Rules of Court, etc. 1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act, 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 2Subs. by the Constitution
(Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 6, for “articles 131A and 139A”
(w.e.f. 13-4-1978). (Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 145-146.) Officers and
servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court. (2) Subject to the
1\[provisions of 2\*\*\* clause (3)\], rules made under this article may
fix the minimum number of Judges who are to sit for any purpose, and may
provide for the powers of single Judges and Division Courts.

3)  3\[2\*\*\* The minimum number\] of Judges who are to sit for the
    purpose of deciding any case involving a substantial question of law
    as to the interpretation of this Constitution or for the purpose of
    hearing any reference under article 143 shall be five:

Provided that, where the Court hearing an appeal under any of the
provisions of this Chapter other than article 132 consists of less than
five Judges and in the course of the hearing of the appeal the Court is
satisfied that the appeal involves a substantial question of law as to
the interpretation of this Constitution the determination of which is
necessary for the disposal of the appeal, such Court shall refer the
question for opinion to a Court constituted as required by this clause
for the purpose of deciding any case involving such a question and shall
on receipt of the opinion dispose of the appeal in conformity with such
opinion.

4)  No judgment shall be delivered by the Supreme Court save in open
    Court, and no report shall be made under article 143 save in
    accordance with an opinion also delivered in open Court.

5)  No judgment and no such opinion shall be delivered by the Supreme
    Court save with the concurrence of a majority of the Judges present
    at the hearing of the case, but nothing in this clause shall be
    deemed to prevent a Judge who does not concur from delivering a
    dissenting judgment or opinion.

<!-- end list -->

146. 1)  Appointments of officers and servants of the Supreme Court
         shall be made by the Chief Justice of India or such other Judge
         or officer of the Court as he may direct: 1Subs. by the
         Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for
         “provisions of clause (3)” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 2Certain words
         omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977,
         s. 6 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 3Subs. by the Constitution
         (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for “The minimum
         number” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). Provided that the President may by
         rule require that in such cases as may be specified in the
         rule, no person not already attached to the Court shall be
         appointed to any office connected with the Court, save after
         consultation with the Union Public Service Commission.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the
    conditions of service of officers and servants of the Supreme Court
    shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief
    Justice of India or by some other Judge or officer of the Court
    authorised by the Chief Justice of India to make rules for the
    purpose:

Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far as they
relate to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, require the approval
of the President.

3)  The administrative expenses of the Supreme Court, including all
    salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the
    officers and servants of the Court, shall be charged upon the
    Consolidated Fund of India, and any fees or other moneys taken by
    the Court shall form part of that Fund.

<!-- end list -->

147. In this Chapter and in Chapter V of Part VI, references to any
     substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this
     Constitution shall be construed as including references to any
     substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the
     Government of India Act, 1935 (including any enactment amending or
     supplementing that Act), or of any Order in Council or order made
     thereunder, or of the Indian Independence Act, 1947, or of any
     order made thereunder. CHAPTER V.—COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL
     OF INDIA

148. 1)  There shall be a Comptroller and Auditor-General of India who
         shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand
         and seal and shall only be removed from office in like manner
         and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
         Interpretation. Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. (Part
         V.—The Union.—Arts. 148-149.) Duties and powers of the
         Comptroller and Auditor-General.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Every person appointed to be the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
    India shall, before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe
    before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by
    him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the
    purpose in the Third Schedule.

3)  The salary and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and
    Auditor-General shall be such as may be determined by Parliament by
    law and, until they are so determined, shall be as specified in the
    Second Schedule:

Provided that neither the salary of a Comptroller and Auditor-General
nor his rights in respect of leave of absence, pension or age of
retirement shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

4)  The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall not be eligible for
    further office either under the Government of India or under the
    Government of any State after he has ceased to hold his office.

5)  Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any law made
    by Parliament, the conditions of service of persons serving in the
    Indian Audit and Accounts Department and the administrative powers
    of the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall be such as may be
    prescribed by rules made by the President after consultation with
    the Comptroller and Auditor-General.

6)  The administrative expenses of the office of the Comptroller and
    Auditor-General, including all salaries, allowances and pensions
    payable to or in respect of the persons serving in that office,
    shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India.

<!-- end list -->

149. The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall perform such duties and
     exercise such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and
     of the States and of any other authority or body as may be
     prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament and, until
     provision in that behalf is so made, shall perform such duties and
     exercise such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and
     of the States as were conferred on or exercisable by the
     Auditor-General of India immediately before the commencement of
     this Constitution in relation to the accounts of the Dominion of
     India and of the Provinces respectively. 1\[150. The accounts of
     the Union and of the States shall be kept in such form as the
     President may, 2\[on the advice of\] the Comptroller and
     Auditor-General of India, prescribe.\]

150. 1)  The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
         relating to the accounts of the Union shall be submitted to the
         President, who shall cause them to be laid before each House of
         Parliament.

<!-- end list -->

2)  The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating
    to the accounts of a State shall be submitted to the Governor
    3\*\*\* of the State, who shall cause them to be laid before the
    Legislature of the State. Form of accounts of the Union and of the
    States. Audit reports. 1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second
    Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 27, for art. 150 (w.e.f. 1-4-1977). 2Subs.
    by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 22, for
    “after consultation with” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 3The words “or
    Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
    1956, s. 29 and Sch. Definition. Governors of States. Executive
    power of State. Appointment of Governor. Term of office of Governor.

PART VI THE STATES 1\*\*\* CHAPTER I.—GENERAL 152. In this Part, unless
the context otherwise requires, the expression “State” 2\[does not
include the State of Jammu and Kashmir\]. CHAPTER II.—THE EXECUTIVE The
Governor 153. There shall be a Governor for each State: 3\[Provided that
nothing in this article shall prevent the appointment of the same person
as Governor for two or more States.\] 154. (1) The executive power of
the State shall be vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him
either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance
with this Constitution. (2) Nothing in this article shall—

1)  be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by any
    existing law on any other authority; or

2)  prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the State from conferring
    by law functions on any authority subordinate to the Governor.

<!-- end list -->

155. The Governor of a State shall be appointed by the President by
     warrant under his hand and seal.

156. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  The Governor shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.

1The words “IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE” omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 2Subs. by s. 29 and Sch.,
ibid., for “means a State specified in Part A of the First Schedule”.
3Added by s. 6, ibid. 76

2)  The Governor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
    President, resign his office.

3)  Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article, a Governor
    shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he
    enters upon his office:

Provided that a Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his
term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his
office. 157. No person shall be eligible for appointment as Governor
unless he is a citizen of India and has completed the age of thirty-five
years.

158. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  The Governor shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or
    of a House of the Legislature of any State specified in the First
    Schedule, and if a member of either House of Parliament or of a
    House of the Legislature of any such State be appointed Governor, he
    shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date
    on which he enters upon his office as Governor.

2)  The Governor shall not hold any other office of profit.

3)  The Governor shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of
    his official residences and shall be also entitled to such
    emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by
    Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made,
    such emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specified in the
    Second Schedule.

1\[(3A) Where the same person is appointed as Governor of two or more
States, the emoluments and allowances payable to the Governor shall be
allocated among the States in such proportion as the President may by
order determine.\]

4)  The emoluments and allowances of the Governor shall not be
    diminished during his term of office.

<!-- end list -->

159. Every Governor and every person discharging the functions of the
     Governor shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe
     in the presence of the Chief Justice of the High Court exercising
     jurisdiction in relation to the State, or, in his absence, the
     seniormost Qualifications for appointment as Governor. Conditions
     of Governor’s office. Oath or affirmation by the Governor. 1Ins. by
     the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 7. Discharge of
     the functions of the Governor in certain contingencies. Power of
     Governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute
     sentences in certain cases. Extent of executive power of State.
     Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor. (Part VI.—The
     States.—Arts. 159—163.) Judge of that Court available, an oath or
     affirmation in the following form, that is to say— “I, A. B., do
     swear in the name of God that I will faithfully solemnly affirm
     execute the office of Governor (or discharge the functions of the
     Governor) of ………….(name of the State) and will to the best of my
     ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law
     and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the
     people of ..………(name of the State).”

160. The President may make such provision as he thinks fit for the
     discharge of the functions of the Governor of a State in any
     contingency not provided for in this Chapter.

161. The Governor of a State shall have the power to grant pardons,
     reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend,
     remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any
     offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive
     power of the State extends.

162. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power
     of a State shall extend to the matters with respect to which the
     Legislature of the State has power to make laws:

Provided that in any matter with respect to which the Legislature of a
State and Parliament have power to make laws, the executive power of the
State shall be subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly
conferred by this Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon the
Union or authorities thereof. Council of Ministers 163. (1) There shall
be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and
advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions, except in so far
as he is by or under this Constitution required to exercise his
functions or any of them in his discretion. (2) If any question arises
whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects which the Governor
is by or under this Constitution required to act in his discretion, the
decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and the
validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called in
question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his
discretion. (3) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was
tendered by Ministers to the Governor shall not be inquired into in any
court. 164. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor
and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice
of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Governor: Provided that in the States of
1\[Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand\], Madhya Pradesh and Orissa, there shall be
a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in charge
of the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and backward classes or any other
work. 2\[(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Chief
Minister, in the Council of Ministers in a State shall not exceed
fifteen per cent. of the total number of members of the Legislative
Assembly of that State: Provided that the number of Ministers, including
the Chief Minister in a State shall not be less than twelve: Provided
further that where the total number of Ministers including the Chief
Minister in the Council of Ministers in any State at the commencement of
the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003 exceeds the said
fifteen per cent. or the number specified in the first proviso, as the
case may be, then the total number of Ministers in that State shall be
brought in conformity with the provisions of this clause within six
months from such date\* as the President may by public notification
appoint. (1B) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State or either
House of the Legislature of a State having Legislative Council belonging
to any political party who is disqualified for being a member of that
House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified
to be appointed as a Minister under clause (1) for duration of the
period commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date on
which the term of his office as such member would expire or where he
contests any election to the Legislative Assembly of a State or either
House of the Legislature of a State having Legislative Council, as the
case may be, before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he
is declared elected, whichever is earlier.\] Other provisions as to
Ministers. 1Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-fourth Amendment) Act,
2006, s. 2, for “Bihar”. 2Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first
Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3. \*7-1-2004, vide S.O. 21(E), dated 7-1-2004.

Advocate-General for the State. Conduct of business of the Government of
a State. (Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 164—166.) (2) The Council of
Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly
of the State.

3)  Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Governor shall
    administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to
    the forms set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

4)  A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a
    member of the Legislature of the State shall at the expiration of
    that period cease to be a Minister.

5)  The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the
    Legislature of the State may from time to time by law determine and,
    until the Legislature of the State so determines, shall be as
    specified in the Second Schedule.

The Advocate-General for the State 165. (1) The Governor of each State
shall appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of a
High Court to be Advocate-General for the State. (2) It shall be the
duty of the Advocate-General to give advice to the Government of the
State upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a
legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him
by the Governor, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or
under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.

3)  The Advocate-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the
    Governor, and shall receive such remuneration as the Governor may
    determine.

Conduct of Government Business 166. (1) All executive action of the
Government of a State shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the
Governor. (2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name
of the Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be
specified in rules to be made by the Governor, and the validity of an
order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in
question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or
executed by the Governor. (3) The Governor shall make rules for the more
convenient transaction of the business of the Government of the State,
and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business in so far as
it is not business with respect to which the Governor is by or under
this Constitution required to act in his discretion. 1* * \* \* \* 167.
It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of each State— (a) to
communicate to the Governor of the State all decisions of the Council of
Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and
proposals for legislation;

2)  to furnish such information relating to the administration of the
    affairs of the State and proposals for legislation as the Governor
    may call for; and

3)  if the Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the
    Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken
    by a Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.

CHAPTER III.—THE STATE LEGISLATURE General 168. (1) For every State
there shall be a Legislature which shall consist of the Governor, and—
(a) in the States of 2\[Andhra Pradesh,\] Bihar, 3\*\*\* 4\[Madhya
Pradesh\], 5\*\*\* 6\[Maharashtra\], 7\[Karnataka\], 8\*\*\* 9\[and
Uttar Pradesh\], two Houses; (b) in other States, one House. Duties of
Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to Governor,
etc. Constitution of Legislatures in States. 1Cl. (4) was ins. by the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 28 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977)
and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
23 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 2Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council
Act, 2005 (1 of 2006), s. 3 (w.e.f. 30-3-2007). 3The word “Bombay”
omitted by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 20
(w.e.f. 1-5-1960). 4No date has been appointed under s. 8(2) of the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, for the insertion of the
words “Madhya Pradesh” in this sub-clause. 5The words “Tamil Nadu,”
omitted by Tamil Nadu Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1986 (40 of
1986), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-11-1986). 6Ins. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act,
1960 (11 of 1960), s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960). 7Subs. by the Mysore State
(Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (31 of 1973), s. 4, for “Mysore” (w.e.f
1-11-1973), which was inserted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 8(1). 8The word “Punjab,” omitted by the Punjab
Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969 (46 of 1969), s. 4 (w.e.f.
7-1-1970). 9Subs. by the West Bengal Legislative Council (Abolition)
Act, 1969 (20 of 1969), s. 4, for “Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal“
(w.e.f. 1-8-1969). Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in
States. Composition of the Legislative Assemblies. (Part VI.—The
States.—Arts. 168—170.) (2) Where there are two Houses of the
Legislature of a State, one shall be known as the Legislative Council
and the other as the Legislative Assembly, and where there is only one
House, it shall be known as the Legislative Assembly. 169. (1)
Notwithstanding anything in article 168, Parliament may by law provide
for the abolition of the Legislative Council of a State having such a
Council or for the creation of such a Council in a State having no such
Council, if the Legislative Assembly of the State passes a resolution to
that effect by a majority of the total membership of the Assembly and by
a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Assembly
present and voting. (2) Any law referred to in clause (1) shall contain
such provisions for the amendment of this Constitution as may be
necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also
contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions as
Parliament may deem necessary.

3)  No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be an amendment of this
    Constitution for the purposes of article 368.

1\[170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the Legislative
Assembly of each State shall consist of not more than five hundred, and
not less than sixty, members chosen by direct election from territorial
constituencies in the State.

2)  For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be divided into
    territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the
    population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to
    it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.

2\[Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “population” means the
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published: 1Subs. by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 9, for art. 170. 2Subs. by the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 , s. 29, for the
Explanation (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). Provided that the reference in this
Explanation to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures
have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first
census taken after the year 1\[2026\] have been published, be construed
as a reference to the 2\[2001\] census.\] (3) Upon the completion of
each census, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of
each State and the division of each State into territorial
constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner
as Parliament may by law determine: Provided that such readjustment
shall not affect representation in the Legislative Assembly until the
dissolution of the then existing Assembly:\] 3\[Provided further that
such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President may,
by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election
to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the territorial
constituencies existing before such readjustment: Provided also that
until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year
1\[2026\] have been published, it shall not be necessary to 4\[readjust—
(i) the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State
as readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and

2)  the division of such State into territorial constituencies as may be
    readjusted on the basis of the 2\[2001\] census,

under this clause.\] 171. (1) The total number of members in the
Legislative Council of a State having such a Council shall not exceed
5\[one-third\] of the total number of members in the Legislative
Assembly of that State: Provided that the total number of members in the
Legislative Council of a State shall in no case be less than forty.
Composition of the Legislative Councils. 1Subs. by the Constitution
(Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5, for “2000” and “1971”
respectively. 2Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act,
2003, s. 4, for “1991”. 3Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 29 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 4Subs. by the
Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5, for certain
words. 5Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 10,
for “one-fourth”. (Part VI.—The States.—Art. 171.) (2) Until Parliament
by law otherwise provides, the composition of the Legislative Council of
a State shall be as provided in clause (3). (3) Of the total number of
members of the Legislative Council of a State—

1)  as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by electorates
    consisting of members of municipalities, district boards and such
    other local authorities in the State as Parliament may by law
    specify;

2)  as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates
    consisting of persons residing in the State who have been for at
    least three years graduates of any university in the territory of
    India or have been for at least three years in possession of
    qualifications prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament as
    equivalent to that of a graduate of any such university;

3)  as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates
    consisting of persons who have been for at least three years engaged
    in teaching in such educational institutions within the State, not
    lower in standard than that of a secondary school, as may be
    prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament;

4)  as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by the members of
    the Legislative Assembly of the State from amongst persons who are
    not members of the Assembly;

5)  the remainder shall be nominated by the Governor in accordance with
    the provisions of clause (5).

<!-- end list -->

4)  The members to be elected under sub-clauses (a),

<!-- end list -->

2)  and (c) of clause (3) shall be chosen in such territorial
    constituencies as may be prescribed by or under any law made by
    Parliament, and the elections under the said sub-clauses and under
    sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be held in accordance with
    the system of proportional representation by means of the single
    transferable vote.

<!-- end list -->

5)  The members to be nominated by the Governor under sub-clause (e) of
    clause (3) shall consist of persons

having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such
matters as the following, namely:— Literature, science, art,
co-operative movement and social service. 172. (1) Every Legislative
Assembly of every State, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for
1\[five years\] from the date appointed for its first meeting and no
longer and the expiration of the said period of 1\[five years\] shall
operate as a dissolution of the Assembly: Provided that the said period
may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be extended by
Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not
extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the
Proclamation has ceased to operate. (2) The Legislative Council of a
State shall not be subject to dissolution, but as nearly as possible
one-third of the members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the
expiration of every second year in accordance with the provisions made
in that behalf by Parliament by law. 173. A person shall not be
qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislature of a State
unless he— 2\[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before
some person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath
or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the
Third Schedule;\] (b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative
Assembly, not less than twenty-five years of age and, in the case of a
seat in the Legislative Council, not less than thirty years of age; and

3)  possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that
    behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.

Duration of State Legislatures. Qualification for membership of the
State Legislature. 1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 24, for “six years” (w.e.f. 6-9-1979). The words “six
years” were subs. for the original words “five years” by the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 30 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977). 2Subs. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963,
s. 4, for cl. (a). (Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 174—177.) Sessions of the
State Legislature, prorogation and dissolution. Right of Governor to
address and send messages to the House or Houses. Special address by the
Governor. Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the
Houses. 1\[174. (1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the
House or each House of the Legislature of the State to meet at such time
and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between
its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first
sitting in the next session. (2) The Governor may from time to time— (a)
prorogue the House or either House;

2)  dissolve the Legislative Assembly.\]

<!-- end list -->

175. 1)  The Governor may address the Legislative Assembly or, in the
         case of a State having a Legislative Council, either House of
         the Legislature of the State, or both Houses assembled
         together, and may for that purpose require the attendance of
         members.

<!-- end list -->

2)  The Governor may send messages to the House or Houses of the
    Legislature of the State, whether with respect to a Bill then
    pending in the Legislature or otherwise, and a House to which any
    message is so sent shall with all convenient despatch consider any
    matter required by the message to be taken into consideration.

<!-- end list -->

176. 1)  At the commencement of 2\[the first session after each general
         election to the Legislative Assembly and at the commencement of
         the first session of each year\], the Governor shall address
         the Legislative Assembly or, in the case of a State having a
         Legislative Council, both Houses assembled together and inform
         the Legislature of the causes of its summons.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of the
    House or either House for the allotment of time for discussion of
    the matters referred to in such address 3\*\*\*.

<!-- end list -->

177. Every Minister and the Advocate-General for a State shall have the
     right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings
     of, the Legislative Assembly of the State or, in the case of a
     State having a Legislative 1Subs. by the Constitution (First
     Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 8, for art. 174. 2Subs. by s. 9, ibid. for
     “every session”. 3The words “and for the precedence of such
     discussion over other business of the House” omitted by s. 9, ibid.
     Council, both Houses, and to speak in, and otherwise to take part
     in the proceedings of, any committee of the Legislature of which he
     may be named a member, but shall not, by virtue of this article, be
     entitled to vote. Officers of the State Legislature

178. Every Legislative Assembly of a State shall, as soon as may be,
     choose two members of the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and
     Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or
     Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose another
     member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.

179. A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of an
     Assembly—

<!-- end list -->

1)  shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;

2)  may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member
    is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the
    Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and

3)  may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Assembly
    passed by a majority of all the then members of the Assembly:

Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved
unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to
move the resolution: Provided further that, whenever the Assembly is
dissolved, the Speaker shall not vacate his office until immediately
before the first meeting of the Assembly after the dissolution. 180. (1)
While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be
performed by the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is
also vacant, by such member of the Assembly as the Governor may appoint
for the purpose. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Speaker and Deputy Speaker. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person
to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker. The
Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his
removal from office is under consideration. The Chairman and Deputy
Chairman of the Legislative Council. Vacation and resignation of, and
removal from, the offices of Chairman and Deputy Chairman. (Part VI.—The
States.—Arts. 180—183.) (2) During the absence of the Speaker from any
sitting of the Assembly the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent,
such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the
Assembly, or, if no such person is present, such other person as may be
determined by the Assembly, shall act as Speaker. 181. (1) At any
sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolution for the
removal of the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the
Speaker, or while any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker,
from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall not,
though he is present, preside, and the provisions of clause (2) of
article 180 shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply
in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker or, as the case may be,
the Deputy Speaker, is absent. (2) The Speaker shall have the right to
speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal from office is
under consideration in the Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything
in article 189, be entitled to vote only in the first instance on such
resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but not in the
case of an equality of votes. 182. The Legislative Council of every
State having such Council shall, as soon as may be, choose two members
of the Council to be respectively Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof
and, so often as the office of Chairman or Deputy Chairman becomes
vacant, the Council shall choose another member to be Chairman or Deputy
Chairman, as the case may be.

183. A member holding office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a
     Legislative Council—

<!-- end list -->

1)  shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council;

2)  may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member
    is the Chairman, to the

Deputy Chairman, and if such member is the Deputy Chairman, to the
Chairman, resign his office; and (c) may be removed from his office by a
resolution of the Council passed by a majority of all the then members
of the Council: Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause
(c) shall be moved unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given
of the intention to move the resolution. 184. (1) While the office of
Chairman is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the
Deputy Chairman or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, by
such member of the Council as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.
(2) During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council
the Deputy Chairman or, if he is also absent, such person as may be
determined by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such
person is present, such other person as may be determined by the
Council, shall act as Chairman. 185. (1) At any sitting of the
Legislative Council, while any resolution for the removal of the
Chairman from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while
any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman from his office is
under consideration, the Deputy Chairman, shall not, though he is
present, preside, and the provisions of clause (2) of article 184 shall
apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to a
sitting from which the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Deputy
Chairman is absent. (2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in,
and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative
Council while any resolution for his removal from office is under
consideration in the Council and shall, notwithstanding anything in
article 189, be entitled to vote only in the first instance on such
resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but not in the
case of an equality of votes. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other
person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.
The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a resolution
for his removal from office is under consideration. (Part VI.—The
States.—Arts. 186—189.) Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and
Deputy Speaker and the Chairman and Deputy Chairman. Secretariat of
State Legislature. Oath or affirmation by members. Voting in Houses,
power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum. 186. There
shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly, and to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative
Council, such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by
the Legislature of the State by law and, until provision in that behalf
is so made, such salaries and allowances as are specified in the Second
Schedule.

187. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  The House or each House of the Legislature of a State shall have a
    separate secretarial staff:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall, in the case of the
Legislature of a State having a Legislative Council, be construed as
preventing the creation of posts common to both Houses of such
Legislature. (2) The Legislature of a State may by law regulate the
recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the
secretarial staff of the House or Houses of the Legislature of the
State.

3)  Until provision is made by the Legislature of the State under clause
    (2), the Governor may, after consultation with the Speaker of the
    Legislative Assembly or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as
    the case may be, make rules regulating the recruitment, and the
    conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff
    of the Assembly or the Council, and any rules so made shall have
    effect subject to the provisions of any law made under the said
    clause.

Conduct of Business 188. Every member of the Legislative Assembly or the
Legislative Council of a State shall, before taking his seat, make and
subscribe before the Governor, or some person appointed in that behalf
by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the
purpose in the Third Schedule.

189. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at
    any sitting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be
    determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting,
    other than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such.

The Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the
first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case
of an equality of votes. (2) A House of the Legislature of a State shall
have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof,
and any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall be valid
notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who
was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the
proceedings.

3)  Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, the
    quorum to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a
    State shall be ten members or one-tenth of the total number of
    members of the House, whichever is greater.

4)  If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the
    Legislative Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be the
    duty of the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, either to
    adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

Disqualifications of Members 190. (1) No person shall be a member of
both Houses of the Legislature of a State and provision shall be made by
the Legislature of the State by law for the vacation by a person who is
chosen a member of both Houses of his seat in one house or the other.
(2) No person shall be a member of the Legislatures of two or more
States specified in the First Schedule and if a person is chosen a
member of the Legislatures of two or more such States, then, at the
expiration of such period as may be specified in rules1 made by the
President, that person’s seat in the Legislatures of all such States
shall become vacant, unless he has previously resigned his seat in the
Legislatures of all but one of the States.

3)  If a member of a House of the Legislature of a State—

Vacation of seats. 1See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership
Rules, 1950 published with the Ministry of Law Notification No. F.
46/50-C, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
p. 678. Disqualifications for membership. (Part VI.—The States.—Arts.
190-191.) (a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned
in 1\[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 191\]; or 2\[(b) resigns his
seat by writing under his hand addressed to the speaker or the Chairman,
as the case may be, and his resignation is accepted by the Speaker or
the Chairman, as the case may be,\] his seat shall thereupon become
vacant: 3\[Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in
sub-clause (b), if from information received or otherwise and after
making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Speaker or the Chairman, as
the case may be, is satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or
genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.\] (4) If for a period of
sixty days a member of a House of the Legislature of a State is without
permission of the House absent from all meetings thereof, the House may
declare his seat vacant: Provided that in computing the said period of
sixty days no account shall be taken of any period during which the
House is prorogued or is adjourned for more than four consecutive days.
191. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for
being, a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a
State— (a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of
India or the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule,
other than an office declared by the Legislature of the State by law not
to disqualify its holder;

2)  if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
    court;

1Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 4, for
“clause (1) of article 191” (w.e.f. 1-3-1985). 2Subs. by the
Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3, for sub-clause
(b). 3Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (c) if he is an undischarged insolvent; (d) if
he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the
citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of
allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;

5)  if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.

1\[Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause\], a person shall not be
deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State specified in the First Schedule by reason only
that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State. 2\[(2) A
person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative
Assembly or Legislative Council of a State if he is so disqualified
under the Tenth Schedule.\] 3\[192. (1) If any question arises as to
whether a member of a House of the Legislature of a State has become
subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of
article 191, the question shall be referred for the decision of the
Governor and his decision shall be final. (2) Before giving any decision
on any such question, the Governor shall obtain the opinion of the
Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.\] 193. If a
person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly or the
Legislative Council of a State before he has complied with the
requirements of article 188, or when he knows that he is not qualified
or that he is disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is
prohibited from so doing by the provisions of any law made by Parliament
or the Legislature of the State, he Decision on questions as to
disqualifications of members. Penalty for sitting and voting before
making oath or affirmation under article 188 or when not qualified or
when disqualified. 1Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment)
Act, 1985, s. 5, for “(2) For the purposes of this article” (w.e.f.
1-3-1985). 2Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-1985). 3Art. 192 has been
successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act,
1976, s. 33 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 25 to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). Powers,
privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of the members and
committees thereof. Salaries and allowances of members. (Part VI.—The
States.—Arts. 193—195.) shall be liable in respect of each day on which
he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered
as a debt due to the State. Powers, Privileges and Immunities of State
Legislatures and their Members 194. (1) Subject to the provisions of
this Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the
procedure of the Legislature, there shall be freedom of speech in the
Legislature of every State. (2) No member of the Legislature of a State
shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything
said or any vote given by him in the Legislature or any committee
thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication
by or under the authority of a House of such a Legislature of any
report, paper, votes or proceedings.

3)  In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of a House
    of the Legislature of a State, and of the members and the committees
    of a House of such Legislature, shall be such as may from time to
    time be defined by the Legislature by law, and, until so defined,
    1\[shall be those of that House and of its members and committees
    immediately before the coming into force of section 26 of the
    Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978\].

4)  The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation
    to persons who by virtue of this Constitution have the right to
    speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House
    of the Legislature of a State or any committee thereof as they apply
    in relation to members of that Legislature.

<!-- end list -->

195. Members of the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council of
     a State shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances
     as may from time to time be determined, by the Legislature of the
     State by law and, 1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth
     Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 26, for certain words (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
     until provision in that respect is so made, salaries and allowances
     at such rates and upon such conditions as were immediately before
     the commencement of this Constitution applicable in the case of
     members of the Legislative Assembly of the corresponding Province.
     Legislative Procedure

196. 1)  Subject to the provisions of articles 198 and 207 with respect
         to Money Bills and other financial Bills, a Bill may originate
         in either House of the Legislature of a State which has a
         Legislative Council.

<!-- end list -->

2)  Subject to the provisions of articles 197 and 198, a Bill shall not
    be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of a
    State having a Legislative Council unless it has been agreed to by
    both Houses, either without amendment or with such amendments only
    as are agreed to by both Houses.

3)  A Bill pending in the Legislature of a State shall not lapse by
    reason of the prorogation of the House or Houses thereof.

4)  A Bill pending in the Legislative Council of a State which has not
    been passed by the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse on a
    dissolution of the Assembly.

5)  A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly of a State, or
    which having been passed by the Legislative Assembly is pending in
    the Legislative Council, shall lapse on a dissolution of the
    Assembly.

<!-- end list -->

197. 1)  If after a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of
         a State having a Legislative Council and transmitted to the
         Legislative Council—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the Bill is rejected by the Council; or
2)  more than three months elapse from the date on which the Bill is
    laid before the Council without the Bill being passed by it; or

( c) the Bill is passed by the Council with amendments to which the
Legislative Assembly does not agree;

Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills. Restriction on
powers of Legislative Council as to Bills other than Money Bills. (Part
VI.—The States.—Arts. 197—198.) Special procedure in respect of Money
Bills. the Legislative Assembly may, subject to the rules regulating its
procedure, pass the Bill again in the same or in any subsequent session
with or without such amendments, if any, as have been made, suggested or
agreed to by the Legislative Council and then transmit the Bill as so
passed to the Legislative Council. (2) If after a Bill has been so
passed for the second time by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted
to the Legislative Council— (a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or
(b) more than one month elapses from the date on which the Bill is laid
before the Council without the Bill being passed by it; or

( c) the Bill is passed by the Council with amendments to which the
Legislative Assembly does not agree;

the Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the
Legislature of the State in the form in which it was passed by the
Legislative Assembly for the second time with such amendments, if any,
as have been made or suggested by the Legislative Council and agreed to
by the Legislative Assembly. (3) Nothing in this article shall apply to
a Money Bill. 198. (1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in a
Legislative Council. (2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the
Legislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative Council, it shall
be transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations, and
the Legislative Council shall within a period of fourteen days from the
date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative
Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative Assembly may
thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of
the Legislative Council.

3)  If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of
    the Legislative Council, the Money

Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the
amendments recommended by the Legislative Council and accepted by the
Legislative Assembly. (4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept
any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill
shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which
it was passed by the Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments
recommended by the Legislative Council.

5)  If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted
    to the Legislative Council for its recommendations is not returned
    to the Legislative Assembly within the said period of fourteen days,
    it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the
    expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by
    the Legislative Assembly.

<!-- end list -->

199. 1)  For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be
         a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or
         any of the following matters, namely:—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of
    any tax;

2)  the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any
    guarantee by the State, or the amendment of the law with respect to
    any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the
    State;

3)  the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of the
    State, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from
    any such Fund;

4)  the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the
    State;

(e ) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of the State, or the increasing of the amount of any
such expenditure;

Definition of “Money Bills”. Assent to Bills. (Part VI.—The
States.—Arts. 199-200.) (f ) the receipt of money on account of the
Consolidated Fund of the State or the public account of the State or the
custody or issue of such money; or

7)  any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses
    (a) to (f).

<!-- end list -->

2)  A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it
    provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties,
    or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for
    services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition,
    abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any
    local authority or body for local purposes.

3)  If any question arises whether a Bill introduced in the Legislature
    of a State which has a Legislative Council is a Money Bill or not,
    the decision of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of such
    State thereon shall be final.

4)  There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted
    to the Legislative Council under article 198, and when it is
    presented to the Governor for assent under article 200, the
    certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly signed by him
    that it is a Money Bill.

<!-- end list -->

200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State
     or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, has been
     passed by both Houses of the Legislature of the State, it shall be
     presented to the Governor and the Governor shall declare either
     that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom
     or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the
     President: Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible
     after the presentation to him of the Bill for assent, return the
     Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting
     that the House or Houses will reconsider the Bill or any specified
     provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the
     desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend
     in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses
     shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed
     again by the House or Houses with or without amendment and
     presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not
     withhold assent therefrom: Provided further that the Governor shall
     not assent to, but shall reserve for the consideration of the
     President, any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if
     it became law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to
     endanger the position which that Court is by this Constitution
     designed to fill.

201. When a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the consideration of the
     President, the President shall declare either that he assents to
     the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom: Provided that,
     where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the
     Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be,
     the Houses of the Legislature of the State together with such a
     message as is mentioned in the first proviso to article 200 and,
     when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider it
     accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt
     of such message and, if it is again passed by the House or Houses
     with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the
     President for his consideration. Procedure in Financial Matters

202. 1)  The Governor shall in respect of every financial year cause to
         be laid before the House or Houses of the Legislature of the
         State a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of
         the State for that year, in this Part referred to as the
         “annual financial statement”.

<!-- end list -->

2)  The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial
    statement shall show separately—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution
    as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State; and
    Bills reserved for consideration. Annual financial statement.
    Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates. (Part VI.—The
    States.—Arts. 202-203.)
2)  the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from
    the Consolidated Fund of the State; and shall distinguish
    expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.

<!-- end list -->

3)  The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the
    Consolidated Fund of each State— (

<!-- end list -->

1)  the emoluments and allowances of the Governor and other expenditure
    relating to his office;

<!-- end list -->

2)  the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of
    the Legislative Assembly and, in the case of a State having a
    Legislative Council, also of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of
    the Legislative Council;

3)  debt charges for which the State is liable including interest,
    sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure
    relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of
    debt;

4)  expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of Judges of
    any High Court;

5)  any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any
    court or arbitral tribunal;

( f) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution, or by the
Legislature of the State by law, to be so charged.

203. 1)  So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon
         the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be submitted to the
         vote of the Legislative Assembly, but nothing in this clause
         shall be construed as preventing the discussion in the
         Legislature of any of those estimates.

<!-- end list -->

2)  So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall
    be submitted in the form of demands for grants to the Legislative
    Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly shall have power to assent,
    or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand
    subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.
3)  No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of
    the Governor.

<!-- end list -->

204. 1)  As soon as may be after the grants under article 203 have been
         made by the Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to
         provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of
         the State of all moneys required to meet—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the grants so made by the Assembly; and
2)  the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State but
    not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement
    previously laid before the House or Houses.

<!-- end list -->

2)  No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the House or
    either House of the Legislature of the State which will have the
    effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any
    grant so made or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on
    the Consolidated Fund of the State, and the decision of the person
    presiding as to whether an amendment is inadmissible under this
    clause shall be final.

3)  Subject to the provisions of articles 205 and 206, no money shall be
    withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State except under
    appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions
    of this article.

<!-- end list -->

205. 1)  The Governor shall—

<!-- end list -->

1)  if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the
    provisions of article 204 to be expended for a particular service
    for the current financial year is found to be insufficient for the
    purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the current
    financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon some
    new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for
    that year, or Appropriation Bills. Supplementary, additional or
    excess grants. (Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 205-206.) Votes on
    account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.
2)  if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year
    in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year,
    cause to be laid before the House or the Houses of the Legislature
    of the State another statement showing the estimated amount of that
    expenditure or cause to be presented to the Legislative Assembly of
    the State a demand for such excess, as the case may be.

<!-- end list -->

2)  The provisions of articles 202, 203 and 204 shall have effect in
    relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to
    any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of
    the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure or the
    grant in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to
    the annual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein
    or to a demand for a grant and the law to be made for the
    authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
    Fund of the State to meet such expenditure or grant.

<!-- end list -->

206. 1)  Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this
         Chapter, the Legislative Assembly of a State shall have power—

<!-- end list -->

1)  to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure
    for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the
    procedure prescribed in article 203 for the voting of such grant and
    the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article
    204 in relation to that expenditure;

2)  to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources
    of the State when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite
    character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the
    details ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;

3)  to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current
    service of any financial year;

and the Legislature of the State shall have power to authorise by law
the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the State for the
purposes for which the said grants are made. (2) The provisions of
articles 203 and 204 shall have effect in relation to the making of any
grant under clause

1)  and to any law to be made under that clause as they have effect in
    relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure
    mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made
    for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the
    Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure.

<!-- end list -->

207. 1)  A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters
         specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article
         199 shall not be introduced or moved except on the
         recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill making such
         provision shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council:
         Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this
         clause for the moving of an amendment making provision for the
         reduction or abolition of any tax.

<!-- end list -->

2)  A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of
    the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the
    imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand
    or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
    reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission,
    alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body
    for local purposes.

3)  A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve
    expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be
    passed by a House of the Legislature of the State unless the
    Governor has recommended to that House the consideration of the
    Bill.

Procedure Generally 208. (1) A House of the Legislature of a State may
make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this
Constitution, its procedure and the conduct of its business. Special
provisions as to financial Bills. Rules of procedure. Regulation by law
of procedure in the Legislature of the State in relation to financial
business. Language to be used in the Legislature. (Part VI.—The
States.—Arts. 208—210.) (2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the
rules of procedure and standing orders in force immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution with respect to the Legislature for
the corresponding Province shall have effect in relation to the
Legislature of the State subject to such modifications and adaptations
as may be made therein by the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, or
the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case may be.

3)  In a State having a Legislative Council the Governor, after
    consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the
    Chairman of the Legislative Council, may make rules as to the
    procedure with respect to communications between the two Houses.

<!-- end list -->

209. The Legislature of a State may, for the purpose of the timely
     completion of financial business, regulate by law the procedure of,
     and the conduct of business in, the House or Houses of the
     Legislature of the State in relation to any financial matter or to
     any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
     Fund of the State, and, if and so far as any provision of any law
     so made is inconsistent with any rule made by the House or either
     House of the Legislature of the State under clause (1) of article
     208 or with any rule or standing order having effect in relation to
     the Legislature of the State under clause (2) of that article, such
     provision shall prevail.

210. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions
    of article 348, business in the Legislature of a State shall be
    transacted in the official language or languages of the State or in
    Hindi or in English:

Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or Chairman of the
Legislative Council, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may
permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of the
languages aforesaid to address the House in his mother-tongue. (2)
Unless the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, this
article shall, after the expiration of a period of fifteen years from
the commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if the words “or
in English” were omitted therefrom: 1\[Provided that in relation to the
2\[Legislatures of the States of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya
and Tripura\] this clause shall have effect as if for the words “fifteen
years” occurring therein, the words “twenty-five years” were
substituted:\] 3\[Provided further that in relation to the
4\[Legislatures of the States of 5\[Arunachal Pradesh, Goa and
Mizoram\]\], this clause shall have effect as if for the words “fifteen
years” occurring therein, the words “forty years” were substituted.\]
211. No discussion shall take place in the Legislature of a State with
respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court in the discharge of his duties.

212. 
<!-- end list -->

1)  The validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall
    not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity
    of procedure.

2)  No officer or member of the Legislature of a State in whom powers
    are vested by or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or
    the conduct of business, or for maintaining order, in the
    Legislature shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in
    respect of the exercise by him of those powers. CHAPTER
    IV.—LEGISLATIVE POWER OF THE GOVERNOR

<!-- end list -->

213. 1)  If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a State
         is in session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a
         State, except when both Houses Restriction on discussion in the
         Legislature. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the
         Legislature. Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during
         recess of Legislature. 1Ins. by the State of Himachal Pradesh
         Act, 1970 (53 of 1970), s. 46 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971). 2Subs. by the
         North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s.
         71, for “Legislature of the State of Himachal Pradesh” (w.e.f.
         21-1-1972). 3Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of
         1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987). 4Subs. by the State of
         Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 42, for
         “Legislature of the State of Mizoram” (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
         5Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18
         of 1987), s. 63, for “Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram” (w.e.f.
         30-5-1987). (Part VI.—The States.—Art. 213.) of the Legislature
         are in session, the Governor is satisfied that circumstances
         exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate
         action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances
         appear to him to require: Provided that the Governor shall not,
         without instructions from the President, promulgate any such
         Ordinance if—

<!-- end list -->

1)  a Bill containing the same provisions would under this Constitution
    have required the previous sanction of the President for the
    introduction thereof into the Legislature; or

2)  he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing the
    same provisions for the consideration of the President; or

3)  an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same
    provisions would under this Constitution have been invalid unless,
    having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had
    received the assent of the President.

<!-- end list -->

2)  An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same
    force and effect as an Act of the Legislature of the State assented
    to by the Governor, but every such Ordinance—

<!-- end list -->

1)  shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State, or where
    there is a Legislative Council in the State, before both the Houses,
    and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the
    reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the expiration of that
    period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative
    Assembly and agreed to by the Legislative Council, if any, upon the
    passing of the resolution or, as the case may be, on the resolution
    being agreed to by the Council; and

( b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.

Explanation.—Where the Houses of the Legislature of a State having a
Legislative Council are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the
period of six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for
the purposes of this clause. (3) If and so far as an Ordinance under
this article makes any provision which would not be valid if enacted in
an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor, it
shall be void: Provided that, for the purposes of the provisions of this
Constitution relating to the effect of an Act of the Legislature of a
State which is repugnant to an Act of Parliament or an existing law with
respect to a matter enumerated in the Concurrent List, an Ordinance
promulgated under this article in pursuance of instructions from the
President shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the State
which has been reserved for the consideration of the President and
assented to by him. 1* * \* \* \* CHAPTER V.—THE HIGH COURTS IN THE
STATES 214. 2\*\*\* There shall be a High Court for each State. 3* * \*
\* \* 215. Every High Court shall be a court of record and shall have
all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for
contempt of itself.

216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other
     Judges as the President may from time to time deem it necessary to
     appoint.

4* * \* \* \* High Courts for States. High Courts to be courts of
record. Constitution of High Courts. 1Cl. (4) was ins. by the
Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3 (retrospectively)
and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
27 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 2The brackets and figure “(1)” omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 3Cls. (2) and
(3) omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. 4Proviso omitted by s. 11, ibid.
(Part VI.—The States.—Art. 217.) Appointment and conditions of the
office of a Judge of a High Court. 217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court
shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal
after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the
State, and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief
Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court, and 1\[shall hold office,
in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as provided in article
224, and in any other case, until he attains the age of 2\[sixty­two
years\]\]: Provided that— (a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office;

2)  a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the
    manner provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a
    Judge of the Supreme Court;

3)  the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by the
    President to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being
    transferred by the President to any other High Court within the
    territory of India.

<!-- end list -->

2)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High
    Court unless he is a citizen of India and—

<!-- end list -->

1)  has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory
    of India; or

2)  has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court 3\*\*\*
    or of two or more such Courts in succession; 4\*\*\*

4* * \* \* \* 1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,
s. 12, for “shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty years”.
2Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4, for
“sixty years”. 3The words “in any State specified in the First
Schedule” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.
29 and Sch. 4The word “or” and sub-clause (c) were ins. by the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 36 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977)
and omitted by the Constitution (Forty­fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.
28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause—
1\[(a) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial
office in the territory of India, there shall be included any period,
after he has held any judicial office, during which the person has been
an advocate of a High Court or has held the office of a member of a
tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special
knowledge of law;\] 2\[(aa)\] in computing the period during which a
person has been an advocate of a High Court, there shall be included any
period during which the person 3\[has held judicial office or the office
of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State,
requiring special knowledge of law\] after he became an advocate; (b) in
computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in
the territory of India or been an advocate of a High Court, there shall
be included any period before the commencement of this Constitution
during which he has held judicial office in any area which was comprised
before the fifteenth day of August, 1947, within India as defined by the
Government of India Act, 1935, or has been an advocate of any High Court
in any such area, as the case may be. 4\[(3) If any question arises as
to the age of a Judge of a High Court, the question shall be decided by
the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the
decision of the President shall be final.\] 218. The provisions of
clauses (4) and (5) of article 124 shall apply in relation to a High
Court as they apply in relation to the Supreme Court with the
substitution of references to the High Court for references to the
Supreme Court. Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme
Court to High Courts. 1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 2Cl. (a) re-lettered as cl. (aa) by
s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 3Subs. by the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 36, for “has held

judicial office” (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 4Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth
Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4 (with retrospective effect). (Part VI.—The
States.—Arts. 219—222.) Oath or affirmation by Judges of High Courts.
Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge. Salaries, etc.,
of Judges. Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another. 219.
Every person appointed to be a Judge of a High Court 1\*\*\* shall,
before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the Governor
of the State, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third
Schedule. 2\[220. No person who, after the commencement of this
Constitution, has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court shall
plead or act in any court or before any authority in India except the
Supreme Court and the other High Courts. Explanation.—In this article,
the expression “High Court” does not include a High Court for a State
specified in Part B of the First Schedule as it existed before the
commencement3 of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956.\] 221.
4\[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of each High Court such
salaries as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision
in that behalf is so made, such salaries as are specified in the Second
Schedule.\] (2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such allowances and to
such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time
to time be determined by or under law made by Parliament and, until so
determined, to such allowances and rights as are specified in the Second
Schedule: Provided that neither the allowances of a Judge nor his rights
in respect of leave of absence or pension shall be varied to his
disadvantage after his appointment. 222. (1) The President may, after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India, transfer a Judge from one
High Court to any other High Court 5\*\*\*. 1The words “in a State“
omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and
Sch. 2Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for art. 220. 31st November, 1956. 4Subs.
by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 3, for cl.
(1) (w.e.f. 1-4-1986). 5The words “within the territory of India“
omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 14. 1\[(2)
When a Judge has been or is so transferred, he shall, during the period
he serves, after the commencement of the Constitution (Fifteenth
Amendment) Act, 1963, as a Judge of the other High Court, be entitled to
receive in addition to his salary such compensatory allowance as may be
determined by Parliament by law and, until so determined, such
compensatory allowance as the President may by order fix.\] 223. When
the office of Chief Justice of a High Court is vacant or when any such
Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform
the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by
such one of the other Judges of the Court as the President may appoint
for the purpose. 2\[224. (1) If by reason of any temporary increase in
the business of a High Court or by reason of arrears of work therein, it
appears to the President that the number of the Judges of that Court
should be for the time being increased, the President may appoint duly
qualified persons to be additional Judges of the Court for such period
not exceeding two years as he may specify. (2) When any Judge of a High
Court other than the Chief Justice is by reason of absence or for any
other reason unable to perform the duties of his office or is appointed
to act temporarily as Chief Justice, the President may appoint a duly
qualified person to act as a Judge of that Court until the permanent
Judge has resumed his duties.

3)  No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court
    shall hold office after attaining the age of 3\[sixty-two years\].\]

4\[224A. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Chief Justice of
a High Court for any State may at any time, with the previous consent of
the President, Appointment of acting Chief Justice. Appointment of
additional and acting Judges. Appointment of retired Judges at sittings
of High Courts. 1Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act,
1963, s. 5. Original cl. (2) was omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 14. 2Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 15, for art. 224. 3Subs. by the Constitution
(Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 6, for “sixty years”. 4Ins. by s. 7,
ibid. Jurisdiction of existing High Courts. Power of High Courts to
issue certain writs. (Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 224A—226.) request any
person who has held the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other
High Court to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court for that State,
and every such person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting,
be entitled to such allowances as the President may by order determine
and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall not
otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that High Court: Provided that
nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such person as
aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that High Court unless he
consents so to do.\] 225. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution
and to the provisions of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by
virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature by this Constitution, the
jurisdiction of, and the law administered in, any existing High Court,
and the respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the
administration of justice in the Court, including any power to make
rules of Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members
thereof sitting alone or in Division Courts, shall be the same as
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution: 1\[Provided
that any restriction to which the exercise of original jurisdiction by
any of the High Courts with respect to any matter concerning the revenue
or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection thereof was
subject immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall
no longer apply to the exercise of such jurisdiction.\] 2\[226. (1)
Notwithstanding anything in article 32 3\*\*\* every High Court shall
have power, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises
jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority, including in
appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories directions,
1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 29,
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979). Original proviso was omitted by the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 37 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 2Subs. by
the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 38, for art. 226
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 3The words, figures and letters “but subject to the
provisions of article 131A and article 226A” omitted by the Constitution
(Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 7 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). orders or
writs, including 1\[writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus,
prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other
purpose.\] (2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue directions,
orders or writs to any Government, authority or person may also be
exercised by any High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the
territories within which the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises
for the exercise of such power, notwithstanding that the seat of such
Government or authority or the residence of such person is not within
those territories. 2\[(3) Where any party against whom an interim order,
whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manner, is made on,
or in any proceedings relating to, a petition under clause (1), without—
(a) furnishing to such party copies of such petition and all documents
in support of the plea for such interim order; and

2)  giving such party an opportunity of being heard,

makes an application to the High Court for the vacation of such order
and furnishes a copy of such application to the party in whose favour
such order has been made or the counsel of such party, the High Court
shall dispose of the application within a period of two weeks from the
date on which it is received or from the date on which the copy of such
application is so furnished, whichever is later, or where the High Court
is closed on the last day of that period, before the expiry of the next
day afterwards on which the High Court is open; and if the application
is not so disposed of, the interim order shall, on the expiry of that
period, or, as the case may be, the expiry of the said next day, stand
vacated.\] 1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 30, for the portion beginning with the words “writs in the
nauture of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and
certiorari, or any of them” and ending with the words “such illegality
has resulted in substantial failure of justice” (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for cls. (3), (4), (5) and (6) (w.e.f.
1-8-1979). Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court.
(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 226-227.) 1\[(4) The power conferred on a
High Court by this article shall not be in derogation of the power
conferred on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32.\] 2226A.
\[Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered in
proceedings under article 226.\] Rep. by the Constitution (Forty-third
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 8 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 227. 3\[(1) Every High
Court shall have superintendence over all courts and tribunals
throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises
jurisdiction.\] (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
provision, the High Court may—

1)  call for returns from such courts;

2)  make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the
    practice and proceedings of such courts; and

3)  prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept
    by the officers of any such courts.

<!-- end list -->

3)  The High Court may also settle tables of fees to be allowed to the
    sheriff and all clerks and officers of such courts and to attorneys,
    advocates and pleaders practising therein:

Provided that any rules made, forms prescribed or tables settled under
clause (2) or clause (3) shall not be inconsistent with the provision of
any law for the time being in force, and shall require the previous
approval of the Governor.

4)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to confer on a High Court
    powers of superintendence over any court or tribunal constituted by
    or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.

1Cl. (7) renumbered as cl. (4) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 30 (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 2Ins. by the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 39 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 3Cl. (1)
has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act, 1976, s. 40 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 31, to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 1* *
\* \* \* 228. If the High Court is satisfied that a case pending in a
court subordinate to it involves a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of this Constitution the determination of which is
necessary for the disposal of the case, 2\[it shall withdraw the case
and 3\*\*\* may—\] (a) either dispose of the case itself, or (b)
determine the said question of law and return the case to the court from
which the case has been so withdrawn together with a copy of its
judgment on such question, and the said court shall on receipt thereof
proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment. 4228A.
\[Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to
constitutional validity of State laws.\] Rep. by the Constitution
(Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 10 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 229. (1)
Appointments of officers and servants of a High Court shall be made by
the Chief Justice of the Court or such other Judge or officer of the
Court as he may direct: Provided that the Governor of the State 5\*\*\*
may by rule require that in such cases as may be specified in the rule
no person not already attached to the Court shall be appointed to any
office connected with the Court save after consultation with the State
Public Service Commission. (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made
by the Legislature of the State, the conditions of service of Transfer
of certain cases to High Court. Officers and servants and the expenses
of High Courts. 1Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 40 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and omitted by the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 31 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). 2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act.
1976, s. 41, for “it shall withdraw the case and may —” (w.e.f.
1-2-1977). 3The words, figures and letters “subject to the provisions of
article 131A,“ omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act,
1977, s. 9 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 4Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 42 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 5The words “in which the
High Court has its principal seat” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. Extension of jurisdiction of High
Courts to Union territories. Establishment of a common High Court for
two or more States. (Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 229—231.) officers and
servants of a High Court shall be such as may be prescribed by rules
made by the Chief Justice of the Court or by some other Judge or officer
of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice to make rules for the
purpose: Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far as
they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, require the
approval of the Governor of the State 1\*\*\*. (3) The administrative
expenses of a High Court, including all salaries, allowances and
pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of the
Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State, and any
fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of that Fund.

2\[230. (1) Parliament may by law extend the jurisdiction of a High
Court to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union
territory.

2)  Where the High Court of a State exercises jurisdiction in relation
    to a Union territory,—

<!-- end list -->

1)  nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as empowering the
    Legislature of the State to increase, restrict or abolish that
    jurisdiction; and

2)  the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to
    any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts in that territory,
    be construed as a reference to the President.

<!-- end list -->

231. 1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions
         of this Chapter, Parliament may by law establish a common High
         Court for two or more States or for two or more States and a
         Union territory.

<!-- end list -->

2)  In relation to any such High Court,—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the reference in article 217 to the Governor of the State shall be
    construed as a reference to the Governors of all the States in
    relation to which the High Court exercises jurisdiction;

1The words “in which the High Court has its principal seat” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 2Subs. by
s. 16, ibid., for arts. 230, 231 and 232. (b) the reference in article
227 to the Governor shall, in relation to any rules, forms or tables for
subordinate courts, be construed as a reference to the Governor of the
State in which the subordinate courts are situate; and

3)  the references in articles 219 and 229 to the State shall be
    construed as a reference to the State in which the High Court has
    its principal seat:

Provided that if such principal seat is in a Union territory, the
references in articles 219 and 229 to the Governor, Public Service
Commission, Legislature and Consolidated Fund of the State shall be
construed respectively as references to the President, Union Public
Service Commission, Parliament and Consolidated Fund of India.\] CHAPTER
VI.—SUBORDINATE COURTS 233. (1) Appointments of persons to be, and the
posting and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by
the Governor of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising
jurisdiction in relation to such State. (2) A person not already in the
service of the Union or of the State shall only be eligible to be
appointed a district judge if he has been for not less than seven years
an advocate or a pleader and is recommended by the High Court for
appointment. 1\[233A. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of
any court,— (a) (i) no appointment of any person already in the judicial
service of a State or of any person who has been for not less than seven
years an advocate or a pleader, to be a district judge in that State,
and

2)  no posting, promotion or transfer of any such person as a district
    judge,

made at any time before the commencement of the Constitution (Twentieth
Amendment) Act, 1966, Appointment of district judges. Validation of
appointments of, and judgments, etc., delivered by, certain district
judges. 1Ins. by the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2.
Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial
service. Control over subordinate courts. Interpretation. (Part VI.—The
States.—Arts. 233A—236.) otherwise than in accordance with the
provisions of article 233 or article 235 shall be deemed to be illegal
or void or ever to have become illegal or void by reason only of the
fact that such appointment, posting, promotion or transfer was not made
in accordance with the said provisions;\] (b) no jurisdiction exercised,
no judgment, decree, sentence or order passed or made, and no other act
or proceeding done or taken, before the commencement of the Constitution
(Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966 by, or before, any person appointed,
posted, promoted or transferred as a district judge in any State
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of article 233 or
article 235 shall be deemed to be illegal or invalid or ever to have
become illegal or invalid by reason only of the fact that such
appointment, posting, promotion or transfer was not made in accordance
with the said provisions.\] 234. Appointments of persons other than
district judges to the judicial service of a State shall be made by the
Governor of the State in accordance with rules made by him in that
behalf after consultation with the State Public Service Commission and
with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.

235. The control over district courts and courts subordinate thereto
     including the posting and promotion of, and the grant of leave to,
     persons belonging to the judicial service of a State and holding
     any post inferior to the post of district judge shall be vested in
     the High Court, but nothing in this article shall be construed as
     taking away from any such person any right of appeal which he may
     have under the law regulating the conditions of his service or as
     authorising the High Court to deal with him otherwise than in
     accordance with the conditions of his service prescribed under such
     law.

236. In this Chapter—

<!-- end list -->

1)  the expression “district judge” includes judge of a city civil
    court, additional district judge, joint district judge, assistant
    district judge, chief judge of a small cause court, chief presidency
    magistrate, additional chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge,
    additional sessions judge and assistant sessions Judge;
2)  the expression “judicial service” means a service consisting
    exclusively of persons intended to fill the post of district judge
    and other civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district
    judge.

<!-- end list -->

237. The Governor may by public notification direct that the foregoing
     provisions of this Chapter and any rules made thereunder shall with
     effect from such date as may be fixed by him in that behalf apply
     in relation to any class or classes of magistrates in the State as
     they apply in relation to persons appointed to the judicial service
     of the State subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be
     specified in the notification. Application of the provisions of
     this Chapter to certain class or classes of magistrates. Part
     VII.—\[The States in Part B of the First Schedule.\] Rep. by the
     Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 120
